
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: iScience
Journal ID: iScience
NLM Journal ID: 101724038

iScience

EISSN: 2589-0042
Publisher: Elsevier

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13498954
PMID: 42633066
DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2026.116877
Article ID: S2589-0042(26)02255-8
Article ID: 116877
Article version: 1
Subjects: Article

Space radiation promotes clonal hematopoiesis and hematologic disease upon aging in a driver gene and sex-specific manner

Evans Megan A. 1
Doviak Heather 1
Polizio Ariel H. 1
Cochran Jesse D. 1 2
Kim Leslie R. 1
Park Eunbee 1
Thel Mark C. 1
Xie Christopher R. 1 8
Srinivasan Ajay R. 1
Marino Lucila 1
Yura Yoshimitsu 1 9
Sun Hanna 1
Mikkilineni Sahithi 1
McKamy Andrew J. 1
Philippos George 3
Domingues Ana Filipa 3 4
Vassiliou George S. 3 4
St Jean Samantha C. 5
Pietras Eric M. 6
Goukassian David A. 7
Walsh Kenneth kw9ar@virginia.edu 1 10 ∗
1 Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA
2 Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA
3 Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
4 Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
5 Department of Pathology and Center for Comparative Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA
6 Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
7 Cardiovascular Research Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
∗ Corresponding author kw9ar@virginia.edu8 Present address: Georgetown University School of Medicine, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20007, USA

9 Present address: Department of Cardiology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan

10 Lead contact

Publication date: 2026 Aug 21
Electronic publication date: 2026 Aug 12
Volume: 29
Issue: 8
Electronic Location ID: 116877
Received 2026 Feb 12; Revised 2026 May 4; Accepted 2026 Jul 6
Copyright: © 2026 The Authors
Copyright year: 2026
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/

Keywords: clonal hematopoiesis, radiation, genetic mutation, sex, driver gene, hematologic disease, TP53

==============================
Summary

The effects of space radiation on clonal hematopoiesis (CH) and its impact on long-term health outcomes are unknown. Using male and female murine models of Trp53-, Ppm1d-, and Tet2-mediated CH, we examined the effects of exposure to gamma radiation, simulated solar particle events, or simplified simulated galactic cosmic rays on the clonal expansion of mutant cells and long-term health outcomes. Radiation accelerated the expansion of Trp53 and Ppm1d, but not Tet2, mutant clones. Over 18 months, male mice with Trp53 mutant cells showed worse survival than controls, which was exacerbated following radiation exposure. The interaction between the mutation and radiation exposure was absent for the other driver genes and in female mice with Trp53 mutations. Male mice with Trp53 mutant cells exhibited evidence of hematologic disease and hematopoietic loss of the Y chromosome. Male astronauts with TP53 clonal hematopoiesis may be at elevated risk of clone growth and hematologic disease following radiation exposure.

Graphical abstract

Highlights

• Space radiation exposure promotes the expansion of Trp53 and Ppm1d mutant clones

• Trp53 mutations worsen male mortality, especially following radiation exposure

• Trp53 mutations in males lead to the development of hematologic disease

• Trp53 mutations in males associate with hematopoietic loss of the Y chromosome

Space medicine; Age; Genomics

Introduction

Exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) during space travel poses significant health risks for astronauts and remains a major barrier to extended human exploration beyond Earth’s magnetic field. The hematopoietic system is remarkably sensitive to IR, and prolonged exposure of terrestrial forms to IR has been linked to elevated leukemia risk and chronic perturbations in immune homeostasis, including lymphopenia, impaired lymphocyte function, and systemic inflammation.1,2 In line with these effects, the NASA Twin Study revealed that extended space travel induces genotoxic stress, heightened DNA damage responses (DDRs), and genomic instability in leukocytes.3 It is conceivable that space radiation-induced DNA damage may promote hematologic malignancies, solid tumors, and other chronic diseases through immune dysfunction. However, radiation does not uniformly promote malignancy or immune alterations, suggesting that additional modifiers likely influence individual risk. Identifying these modifiers will be key to predicting which astronauts are most susceptible to long-term health complications after extended space missions.

Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is a prevalent condition whereby a substantial portion of mature blood cells are derived from a single dominant hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) clone. It typically arises when a somatic driver mutation occurs within a hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC), thereby providing a competitive advantage to the mutant HSPC. As a result, the HSPC-derived mutation can propagate through the hematopoietic system and into its immediate cellular progeny, giving rise to a genetically distinct population of mature blood cells over time.4 The prevalence of CH rises sharply with age, where at least 10% of individuals older than 70 years of age have relatively large hematopoietic mutant clones.5 Studies using deeper sequencing technologies suggest an even higher prevalence of CH, and that by middle age almost everyone will have small mutant blood clones.6 Numerous driver gene mutations can lead to CH in the elderly, however, they most frequently occur in the epigenetic regulators, DNMT3A, TET2 and ASXL1.5,7 In addition to age-associated CH, it has been observed that an accelerated form of CH is prevalent in cancer survivors. This has been coined therapy-related CH (t-CH) and is typically associated with mutations in DDR genes, such as TP53 and PPM1D.8,9 These mutations are thought to provide a survival advantage to genotoxic stress induced by cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, which allows the clone to persist following exposure to these agents.

Individuals with CH have a higher risk of developing hematological malignancy. However, in many cases, mutant clones will not progress to malignancy, as they generally require the acquisition of multiple oncogenic mutations.10 Rather, it has been identified that individuals with CH have a higher risk of developing age-associated conditions, such as cardiovascular disease and certain solid cancers, through changes in immune cell function.5,11,12,13,14 Notably, larger clones confer greater risk for both cardiovascular and cancer development,10,11,14,15,16 suggesting that limiting clonal expansion may mitigate downstream health effects. Exposure to IR, including medical forms, has been associated with the expansion of mutant hematopoietic clones, particularly those harboring mutations in DDR.9,17,18 The impact of space radiation on CH remains poorly understood, though preliminary evidence suggests that it may promote growth of mutant clones and be associated with increased health risks for astronauts. Ultra-deep sequencing of blood from 14 astronauts revealed an enrichment of TP53 mutations, an atypical pattern compared to the general population.19 Moreover, the NASA Twin Study documented post-flight expansion of a TET2 clone.20 A recent modeling study, using data from a published human cohort and the NASA space cancer risk model, suggested that space radiation may increase the risk of death from hematological malignancies, coronary heart disease, and stroke in male and female crew members with CH.21 Together these findings raise the possibility that space radiation could promote clonal expansion and augment long-term disease risk in astronauts with preexisting CH, however this hypothesis requires direct testing in model systems.

In the current study, we sought to evaluate the effects of space radiation and the risk mediated by CH on long-term health outcomes using male and female mouse models of CH. We focused our investigation on cancer and cardiovascular endpoints, given their strong association with CH.14 We studied the effects of radiation from gamma rays, simulated solar particle events (SPEsim), and simplified simulated galactic cosmic rays (simGCRsim) on CH associated with the DDR driver gene mutations, Trp53 and Ppm1d, alongside the prevalent age-associated CH driver gene mutation, Tet2. We hypothesized that exposure to space radiation would promote CH clone growth and thereby impact long-term health outcomes in a radiation-, gene-, and sex-specific manner.

Results

Space radiation promotes the expansion of Trp53 and Ppm1d but not Tet2 mutant clones

To establish mouse models of CH suitable for studying the effects of radiation, we generated bone marrow chimeras using an adoptive transplant approach. This strategy circumvents the need for irradiation, which is typically used to condition recipients for donor cell engraftment. In this model, CD45.2+ bone marrow cells derived from WT, Trp53 mutant, Ppm1d mutant, or Tet2-deficient (referred to as mutant) male and female donors were transplanted into non-conditioned CD45.1+ recipient mice of their respective sex. Donor cell engraftment and blood cell parameters were confirmed at approximately 1 month following transplant, after which mice were shipped to Brookhaven National Laboratories for radiation. At 4 months of age, mice were assigned to one of the four groups: no irradiation (no IR), 1 Gy gamma radiation, 1 Gy SPEsim radiation, or 1 Gy simGCRsim radiation. Following radiation exposure, mice were returned to the University of Virginia and monitored until they reached a humane endpoint or the study was terminated at 18 months post-IR. Serial blood sampling and echocardiography were performed over the experimental time course at the timepoints indicated (Figure 1). Importantly, mice displayed no evidence of overt hematologic disease at baseline or 1 month post-irradiation, consistent with the clinical definition of CH (Figures S1–S6).Figure 1 Experimental timelines for each driver gene mutation cohort

Non-conditioned CD45.1+ recipient mice were transplanted with CD45.2+ bone marrow cells derived from either wild-type (WT) or mutant (Trp53, Ppm1d, or Tet2) donors. At ∼2 months post-transplant, mice received either no irradiation or irradiation with gamma, simulated solar particle events (SPEsim) or simulated simplified galactic cosmic rays (simGCRsim). Echocardiography and blood sampling were performed at timepoints indicated during the experimental time course. Mice were euthanized at 18 months post-irradiation (IR) or after reaching a humane endpoint, whichever came first.

In mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant bone marrow, donor cells expanded over the study time course in the absence of radiation (Figures 2A, 2B, S7 and S8). This expansion occurred in both sexes and appeared to be slightly accelerated in the lymphocyte compartment, indicative of lymphoid skewing (Figures 2A, 2B, S7D–S7F and S8D–S7F). Following exposure to radiation, there was a marked increase in Trp53 mutant donor cell expansion across all leukocyte subsets in recipients of both sexes (Figures 2A, 2B, S7 and S8). There was little difference in the expansion of mutant donor cells between animals exposed to gamma and simGCRsim radiation (Figures 2A, 2B, S7 and S8). Although in male mice, the simGCRsim radiation group showed significantly greater expansion of CD8+ T lymphocytes, with differences evident at multiple post-radiation exposure time points (Figure S7F). In female mice, the simGCRsim radiation group exhibited significantly less expansion of B cells at 8 months post-irradiation compared to the gamma radiation group (Figure S8D). Mice exposed to SPEsim radiation experienced significantly less expansion of mutant donor cells compared to those exposed to gamma radiation. This was evident in both male and female mice and occurred across multiple leukocyte subsets (Figures 2A, 2B, S7 and S8).Figure 2 Effect of space radiation on the clonal expansion of mutant donor white blood cells

Percentage of CD45.2+ donor white blood cells in the peripheral blood of mice transplanted with wild-type (WT) or mutant (Mut) bone marrow cells following exposure to gamma, simulated solar particle event (SPEsim), or simulated simplified galactic cosmic ray (simGCRsim) radiation. No irradiation (No IR) served as a control.

(A and B) Donor cell chimerism for male and female mice transplanted with WT or Trp53 Mut cells post-irradiation (IR). Male: WT n = 6, Mut n = 1–6; Female: WT n = 4–6, Mut n = 5–6. X indicates groups with no surviving animals at the corresponding time point. Also see Figures S7 and S8.

(C and D) Donor cell chimerism for male and female mice transplanted with WT or Ppm1d Mut cells post IR. Male: WT n = 6, Mut n = 5–6; Female WT n = 5–6, Mut n = 3–6. Also see Figures S9 and S10.

(E and F) Donor cell chimerism for male and female mice transplanted with WT or Tet2 Mut cells post IR. Male: WT n = 5–6, Mut n = 3–6; female: WT n = 6, Mut n = 2–6. Also see Figures S11 and S12.

Data are shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparisons made using a two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. Due to mortality in some groups, statistical comparisons were not conducted at time points where n < 3 in any group across either sex. ∗p < 0.05 vs. WT counterpart, ∗∗p < 0.01 vs. WT counterpart, ∗∗∗p < 0.001 vs. WT counterpart. ##p < 0.01 vs. no IR Mut, ###p < 0.001 vs. no IR Mut. ˆp < 0.05 vs. Gamma Mut, ˆˆp < 0.01 vs. Gamma Mut, ˆˆˆp < 0.001 vs. Gamma Mut.

In contrast to Trp53, mice transplanted with Ppm1d mutant bone marrow showed no expansion of donor cells in the absence of radiation (Figures 2C, 2D, S9 and S10). Following radiation exposure, Ppm1d mutant donor cells showed expansion, where the profile differed between sexes and radiation types. For males, gamma and simGCRsim had similar effects on mutant cell expansion for most leukocyte subsets (Figures 2C and S9). However, exposure to SPEsim radiation was not associated with the expansion of donor mutant cells (Figures 2C and S9). In females, exposure to all radiation types promoted mutant cell expansion across most leukocyte subsets. However, this expansion was greatest in those that were exposed to gamma radiation (Figures 2D and S10).

In mice transplanted with Tet2-deficient bone marrow, donor cells showed marked expansion in the absence of radiation (Figures 2E, 2F, S11 and S12). This occurred in both sexes and was greatest in myeloid and B cells (Figures 2E, 2F, S11A–S11D and S12A–S12D), as described previously.12,22 In contrast to the DDR driver genes, exposure to radiation had largely no effect on the expansion of Tet2-deficient mutant cells (Figures 2E, 2F, S11 and S12). At the level of specific leukocyte subsets, males exposed to SPEsim radiation exhibited a modest increase in the expansion of myeloid cells compared to non-irradiated controls (Figures S11A and S11C). In female mice, exposure to gamma radiation was associated with a modest increase in expansion of Ly6Clo monocytes, neutrophils and T cells compared to animals that received no IR at some timepoints (Figures S12B, S12C, S12E and S12F).

Space radiation accelerates mortality in mice engrafted with Trp53 mutant cells in a sex-dependent manner

Assessment of survival across the experimental time course showed radiation-, mutation- and sex-specific effects across the cohorts. In the Trp53 cohort, it was revealed that there was a strong male-specific effect among mice transplanted with mutant cells that was further exacerbated by exposure to radiation (Figure 3A). More specifically, compared to WT controls, male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells tended to have worse survival, which reached statistical significance in all radiation groups (Figure 3A). Male mice with Trp53 mutant cells that were exposed to simGCRsim radiation showed significantly worse survival compared to those that received no radiation (Figure 3A). A similar trend was observed for gamma radiation, although this did not reach statistical significance (Figure 3A). In contrast, the effect of the mutation and radiation on survival was absent in females (Figure 3B).Figure 3 Effect of space radiation on survival of mice with clonal hematopoiesis

Survival of mice transplanted with wild-type (WT) or mutant (Mut) bone marrow cells following exposure to gamma, simulated solar particle event (SPEsim), or simulated simplified galactic cosmic ray (simGCRsim) radiation. No irradiation (No IR) served as a control.

(A and B) Survival of male and female mice transplanted with WT or Trp53 Mut cells post-irradiation (IR).

(C and D) Survival of male and female mice transplanted with WT or Ppm1d Mut cells post-IR.

(E and F) Survival of male and female mice transplanted with WT or Tet2 Mut cells post-IR.

Number of surviving mice indicated as a fraction in box under each curve. Survival distributions were compared using the log rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Multiple testing correction was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method; thus, values represent FDR-adjusted p values (denoted as q). ∗q < 0.05 and ∗∗q < 0.01 vs. WT counterpart. #q < 0.05 vs. Mut Gamma.

For Ppm1d, there was no detectable effect of the mutation or radiation on survival in either male or female mice (Figures 3C and 3D). For Tet2, it was observed that females transplanted with Tet2-deficient cells had worse survival, which appeared to be dependent on the mutation and not radiation (Figure 3F). A similar trend was observed in males transplanted with Tet2-deficient cells, although this did not reach statistical significance (Figure 3E).

Cardiac function and remodeling in mice with clonal hematopoiesis following exposure to space radiation

Given the strong association of CH with cardiovascular conditions,5,11,15,23,24,25 we performed echocardiography to investigate whether CH and/or radiation exposure affected cardiac function and parameters of remodeling. We report three time points over the experimental course: baseline, midpoint, and study end (timing shown in Figure 1). Due to small group sizes and intergroup variability, we compared within-group baseline measurements with those obtained at midpoint and study end. For male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells and female mice transplanted with Tet2-deficient cells, only midpoint comparisons were made, as substantial mortality prevented analyses by statistics at study end. Across the three driver gene mutations, some groups demonstrated reductions in parameters of systolic cardiac function (i.e., ejection fraction [EF] and/or fractional shortening [FS]) relative to baseline; these changes did not appear to be associated with radiation exposure or mutation status across the three driver genes in either sex (Figures S13–S18). Moreover, multiple groups demonstrated changes in left ventricular (LV) structure, including LV end-systolic diameter (LVESD), LV posterior wall diameter (LVPWD), and LV mass, particularly at study end. Similarly, several groups showed increases in relative wall thickness (RWT), indicative of a concentric ventricular remodeling pattern. Despite these alterations in cardiac geometry, they did not appear to be associated with radiation exposure or mutation status in animals of either sex (Figures S13–S18). With significant mortality in several groups, it is possible that our study may not have been sufficiently powered to detect small differences amongst groups, particularly against the background of aging and radiation exposure.

As the primary analyses included only mice that survived to the designated timepoints, any cardiac abnormalities in animals euthanized at humane endpoints before study completion may have been missed. To address this, a separate analysis was conducted to identify potential cardiac abnormalities in mice at term, irrespective of survival to study end. To do this, all baseline measurements were collated from the WT groups. Abnormalities were defined as an EF or FS measurement two standard deviations below baseline or an LVESD, LV end diastolic diameter (LVEDD), LVPWD, LV mass or RWT measurement two standard deviations above baseline (Tables S1–S6). Across all cohorts, increases in LV mass, and to a lesser extent LVPWD and RWT, occurred most frequently at term, whereas marked changes in EF, FS, and LV dimensions were comparatively less common, regardless of mutation or radiation status (Tables S1–S6). Within individual cohorts, there were no pronounced effects of the mutation or radiation on cardiac parameters. Except for Trp53 mutant mice of both sexes, which exhibited approximately twice the frequency of RWT changes when pooled across radiation types (Tables S1 and S2). In some cohorts (Trp53 male, Trp53 female and Ppm1d male), mutants exhibited a reduced frequency of abnormalities in EF, FS, and LV mass compared to WT controls (Tables S1–S3).

Male mice with hematopoietic mutations in Trp53 develop hematological malignancies and bone marrow failure syndromes

During postmortem tissue collection of male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant bone marrow cells, we frequently observed multiple gross abnormalities, including splenomegaly and/or hepatomegaly, mottled livers, enlarged lymph nodes, enlarged thymi, and pallor of the ears and paw pads (i.e., Figure 4A). Correspondingly, terminal complete blood cell (CBC) analyses revealed that multiple hematologic parameters were outside the normal range. Mice often exhibited lymphopenia, monocytosis, granulocytosis, and anemia (with or without macrocytosis), together with either thrombocytosis or thrombocytopenia (Figure 4B). By contrast, such abnormalities were either absent or occurred far less frequently in mice transplanted with WT bone marrow cells (Figure 4B).Figure 4 Male mice with Trp53-mediated clonal hematopoiesis develop hematologic disease

(A) Representative necropsy image showing frequently observed gross pathologies in mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant bone marrow. Pathologies included enlarged lymph nodes (Enl LN), an enlarged thymus (Enl Thy), hepatomegaly (HM), and splenomegaly (SM). Also see Table S7.

(B) Heatmap showing complete blood count abnormalities at term in mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant (mut) and wild-type (WT) bone marrow cells following exposure to gamma, simulated solar particle event (SPEsim), or simulated simplified galactic cosmic ray (simGCRsim) radiation. No irradiation (No IR) served as a control. Each square represents the result for a given parameter in an individual animal. Parameter abbreviations: Neut: neutrophils, Lymph: lymphocytes, Mono: monocytes, Eos: eosinophils, Bas: basophils, RBC: red blood cells, HGB: hemoglobin, HCT: hematocrit, MCV: mean corpuscular volume, PLT: platelets. Also see Table S7.

(C) Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections showing aberrant hematolymphoid proliferation and/or neoplasia in the spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, bone marrow, lung, liver, and kidney. Scale bars represent 50 μm except for the spleen, where the scale bars represent 200 μm. Also see Table S7.

(D) Representative H&E stained section of the bone marrow showing reduced cellularity. Scale bar represents 100 μm. Also see Table S7.

(E) Representative H&E stained section showing histiocytic sarcoma detected in the liver. Scale bars represent 25 μm. Also see Table S7.

(F) Representative flow cytometry plots from the blood of WT and Trp53 mut mice at term showing increased blood monocyte contribution in a mouse transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells.

(G) Representative flow cytometry plots from the blood of WT and Trp53 mut mice at term showing a double CD4/CD8-positive T cell population in a Trp53 mutant mouse, which was composed almost entirely of mutant donor cells.

(H) Predicted hematological conditions in animals transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells and exposed to no IR or radiation with gamma, SPEsim, or simGCRsim rays. Mice were classified according to evidence of lymphoid malignancy, myeloid malignancy, bone marrow (BM) failure/myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or histiocytic sarcoma. Predictions based on integrated evidence from necropsies (A), complete blood counts (B), H&E histology (C-E) and flow cytometry (F-G) were possible for the following number of mice in each group: no IR n = 6/6, gamma n = 4/6, SPEsim n = 6/6 and simGCRsim n = 5/6. ND denotes none detected. Data are shown as total count per group. Also see Table S7.

(I) Number of solid tumors observed in animals transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells and exposed to no IR or radiation with gamma, SPEsim or simGCRsim. Data on solid tumors were available for the following number of mice from each group: no IR n = 6/6, gamma n = 4/6, SPEsim n = 6/6, and simGCRsim n = 5/6. ND denotes none detected. Data are shown as total count per group. Also see Table S7.

To further investigate these findings in male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed on multiple postmortem tissues, which were subsequently evaluated by a board-certified veterinary pathologist. Histopathological examination revealed aberrant hematolymphoid proliferation and/or neoplasia in multiple organs, including the spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, bone marrow, lung, liver, and kidneys (Figure 4C). In the tissues of some animals, clear lymphoid cell proliferation was identified, consistent with lymphoma (i.e., Figure 4C thymus, lymph node, liver, kidney). Additional pathologies frequently noted included reduced bone marrow cellularity (i.e., Figure 4D) and hepatic histiocytic sarcoma (i.e., Figure 4E).

To predict potential conditions that may have contributed to these pathologies and mortality in male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells, we integrated findings from necropsies, blood and bone marrow flow cytometry, CBC parameters, and histopathology (i.e., Figures 4A–4G, collated in Table S7). Mice were classified according to evidence of myeloid malignancy, lymphoid malignancy, bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), histiocytic sarcoma, or solid tumor. Animals exhibiting features of multiple conditions were counted in each relevant category. Although no striking intergroup differences were detected, animals exposed to simGCRsim radiation demonstrated a tendency toward lymphoid rather than overt myeloid malignancies (Figure 4H). Conversely, mice exposed to gamma radiation showed a reduction in lymphoid malignancies and an absence of bone marrow failure/MDS and histiocytic sarcoma (Figure 4H). However, since three of six animals in this group were found dead, with tissues unavailable for analysis in two of the mice, these findings should be interpreted with caution. In contrast to hematologic disease, few mice showed evidence of solid tumors (Figure 4I).

Loss of the Y chromosome predicts death in male mice with hematopoietic Trp53 mutations

As many male mice with Trp53-mediated CH developed features of hematologic disease, this would suggest that mutant cells acquired additional mutations required for malignant transformation. Given the striking male-specific differences in mortality, we examined whether these findings were associated with the male-specific mutation, hematopoietic mosaic loss of the Y chromosome (LOY). To do this, splenic tissue collected postmortem was evaluated by digital PCR for extent of Y chromosome loss. Substantial LOY was detected in the Trp53 mutant groups, with a significant increase from 0% observed in all groups except those exposed to gamma radiation (Figure 5A). Median LOY levels appeared similar across Trp53 mutant groups and did not appear to be elevated in those exposed to a single dose of radiation. In contrast, male mice transplanted with WT, Ppm1d mutant, or Tet2-deficient bone marrow showed no evidence of LOY (Figure 5A). When data from WT and Trp53 mutant groups were combined regardless of radiation type, mice with Trp53 mutant bone marrow exhibited a significantly higher percentage of LOY compared with WT counterparts (Figure 5B). To determine whether an association existed between LOY and mortality, the male WT and Trp53 groups were combined and stratified by LOY levels: LOYlow (LOY <18%) or LOYhigh (LOY ≥18%). It was found that mice with LOYhigh exhibited significantly greater mortality compared to those with low levels, suggesting that LOY is associated with mortality in male mice (HR: 8.6, 95% CI: 2.25–32.87; Figure 5C).Figure 5 Hematopoietic Trp53 mutations are associated with hematopoietic loss of the Y chromosome (LOY) in male mice

LOY was determined in the spleens of male mice transplanted with wild-type (WT) or mutant (mut) bone marrow cells. Spleens were collected at term in non-irradiated (No IR) mice and those exposed to gamma, simulated solar particle event (SPEsim), or simulated simplified galactic cosmic ray (simGCRsim) radiation.

(A) Percentage of LOY cells in the spleens of male mice transplanted with WT, Trp53 mut, Ppm1d mut or Tet2 mut bone marrow cells. WT: n = 11–12, Trp53 mut: n = 3–6, Ppm1d mut: n = 5–6, Tet2 mut: n = 5–6. Data are shown as median. Significant LOY identified by a one-sample t-test and Wilcoxon test. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01.

(B) Violin plots showing the percentage of LOY cells in mice transplanted with WT or Trp53 mut cells grouped regardless of radiation type. WT: n = 23 and Trp53 mut: n = 19. Groups were compared using an unpaired t test. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.

(C) Survival of mice presented in B stratified according to percentage LOY: LOYlow (LOY<18%) and LOYhigh (LOY≥18%). LOYlown = 31 and LOYhighn = 11. Data were compared using a log rank (Mantel-Cox) test. ∗∗∗p < 0.001.

Discussion

CH has emerged as a novel risk factor for diverse age-related pathologies, including solid and hematologic malignancies as well as cardiovascular disease.14 Evidence suggests that exposure to genotoxic stress, such as radiation, can promote the expansion of certain CH clones.9,14,17 As humans embark on deep-space missions and are inevitably exposed to higher levels of ionizing space radiation, it is conceivable that such exposure could select for or accelerate the growth of mutant hematopoietic clones, with potential implications for long-term astronaut health. Thus, understanding how CH interacts with space radiation, and the potential risks this poses to human health, is essential for ensuring optimal astronaut health during future deep-space missions.

Using male and female mouse models of CH, we investigated the effects of space radiation on clonal expansion and its downstream consequences on health outcomes. As predicted, clonal expansion occurred in a driver gene- and radiation-specific manner. Specifically, in the absence of radiation, Trp53 and Tet2 but not Ppm1d mutant clones expanded on their own, as reported previously.12,26 Following exposure to radiation, Trp53 and Ppm1d, but not Tet2, mutant clones showed accelerated expansion. In general, gamma and GCR-sim radiation produced similar effects on expansion, while SPEsim radiation had a significantly smaller effect. Trp53 and Ppm1d are DDR genes, and mutations in these genes can confer a survival advantage following exposure to genotoxic stress, such as radiation.8,9,14 By contrast, Tet2 is an age-related driver gene, and its expansion has not been previously associated with genotoxic stress exposure. It is also noteworthy that, across all three driver genes, patterns of expansion were similar between males and females, although female mice tended to exhibit greater expansion of mutant leukocytes compared to males. While this may indicate a sex-specific effect on clonal expansion, it is also possible that this is a limitation of the congenic CD45.1/CD45.2 system, where it has been reported that CD45.1-expressing female mice show a greater bias toward CD45.2 reconstitution than males.27

In terms of survival, we found clear sex-specific differences in how CH driver mutations affect long-term outcomes, and these effects varied depending on the mutation and radiation exposure. Trp53-mediated CH markedly reduced survival in male, but not female mice, and this susceptibility was worsened by radiation exposure, particularly gamma and simGCRsim radiation. In contrast, Ppm1d mutant CH did not affect survival in either sex or after radiation exposure. Tet2 mutant CH, however, was associated with poorer survival in females, and this effect appeared to be independent of radiation exposure. A similar radiation-independent trend was observed in males, although this failed to reach statistical significance. Together, these data demonstrate that survival outcomes in the setting of CH show mutation- and sex-specific vulnerabilities, which are modulated by radiation exposure for animals with Trp53-driven CH.

Our prior deep error-corrected sequencing analyses of peripheral blood from 14 Shuttle astronauts demonstrated that TP53 mutations were the most common acquired variants.19 Considering this and the considerable mortality observed in Trp53 mutant male mice after radiation exposure, we undertook additional pathological assessments in male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells, as this form of CH may represent a significant risk factor for male astronauts exposed to ionizing space radiation. Analyses showed that many mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells developed pathologies consistent with hematologic disease, including both myeloid and lymphoid malignancy, MDS/bone marrow failure and/or histiocytic sarcoma. These findings are in line with clinical observations where TP53 mutations are implicated in a diverse range of hematologic malignancies.28,29 Overall, there did not appear to be any overt differences in the type of hematologic disease animals developed in each radiation group, although animals exposed to simGCRsim radiation tended to exhibit evidence of lymphoid rather than myeloid malignancies, which may be a consequence of the early accelerated expansion in this group.

The observation that male mice with Trp53-mediated CH were prone to developing hematologic disease raises the possibility that Trp53 mutant clones acquired additional mutations leading to malignant transformation. TP53 encodes a tumor suppressor protein that preserves genomic integrity by inducing cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to DNA damage, such as that induced by radiation.30 Mutations in TP53 therefore impair the DDR and create a permissive environment for the accumulation of secondary mutations that may drive leukemogenesis. While TP53 mutant hematopoietic malignancies are often associated with a complex karyotype,29 the male-specific increase in mortality prompted us to evaluate whether hematopoietic mosaic LOY, a male-restricted mutation, could contribute to this effect. Indeed, male mice with Trp53 mutations had substantially higher levels of LOY in their splenocytes compared with WT counterparts, an effect that was similar for non-irradiated and irradiated animals. By contrast, we did not observe LOY in male mice transplanted with Ppm1d or Tet2 mutant cells. Moreover, within the entire Trp53 cohort, we found that LOY at a cell fraction of ≥18% was associated with significantly worse survival, suggesting that LOY is a biomarker of poor prognosis in this cohort.

Although the percentage of LOY appeared similar between irradiated and non-irradiated males, several factors must be considered when interpreting these data. We found that radiation accelerated hematologic disease and consequent death onset in mice with Trp53 mutant CH, a finding that likely reflects the more rapid expansion of Trp53 mutant clones in these groups. Since larger clones have an increased chance of acquiring additional mutations, such as LOY, it is plausible that LOY arose earlier in the irradiated animals. However, LOY was assessed only at the terminal time point, after hematologic disease had already developed, leading to similar end-stage LOY frequencies between irradiated and non-irradiated groups. It is also conceivable that LOY may itself promote malignant transformation once it surpasses a critical threshold in Trp53 mutant clones. However, because more than 80% of male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells developed or succumbed to hematologic disease, a single terminal measurement of LOY provided limited insight into the temporal dynamics of this process and ultimately whether a specific LOY threshold predicts hematologic progression. Nevertheless, the association between high LOY levels and earlier death is consistent with LOY facilitating the emergence or progression of hematologic disease in male mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells, as this was the main pathology detected in these animals.

Many TP53 mutant cancers display male-specific biases;31 however, to the best of our knowledge, such patterns have not been clearly described for TP53 mutant hematologic malignancies. The relationship is likely complex, as many TP53 mutant hematologic cancers arise following cytotoxic therapy for cancer (i.e., therapy-related myeloid neoplasms),28 and inherent sex biases in primary cancer incidence can influence treatment patterns and, consequently, subsequent risk. Nevertheless, emerging data show an association between TP53 mutations and LOY occurrence. For instance, an analysis of the UK Biobank found that in men with age-related hematopoietic LOY, there was an enrichment of TP53 mutant CH.32 Moreover, pan-cancer genome analyses suggest that for certain LOY-positive cancers, TP53 is more frequently mutated.33,34 Independent of TP53, LOY is associated with various cancers in men and has been reported to be predictive of poor clinical outcome in hematological malignancy.35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43 Supporting a biological role for LOY in tumorigenesis, work from our group and others has shown that LOY leukocytes display an immunosuppressive phenotype, characterized by the elevated expression of transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFβ1) and immune checkpoint inhibitory molecules,44,45,46 which are established mediators of tumor immune evasion.47 In light of these findings, it is plausible that the acquisition of LOY in TP53 mutant cells serves as a cooperating secondary alteration that enables progression to hematologic disease in male mice. Nevertheless, additional studies are necessary to better understand the precise mechanisms by which TP53 mutations and LOY cooperate in hematologic malignancy.

Somewhat surprisingly, we did not observe a significant effect of any driver gene on systolic cardiac function or cardiac remodeling. Notably, Trp53-, Ppm1d-, and Tet2-mediated CH have been shown to worsen systolic cardiac function and remodeling in animal models of cardiac injury.13,26,48 It should be acknowledged that with significant mortality in several groups, it is possible that our study may not have been sufficiently powered to detect small differences among groups, particularly against the background of aging and radiation exposure. Any subtle differences between groups could be reflective of a survivor bias and thus limit the extent to which these data can be reliably extrapolated.

From this study in mice, several inferences can be made regarding the risk CH poses to long-term astronaut safety during future deep-space missions. Firstly, it suggests that individuals, especially males with hematopoietic TP53 mutations, face an elevated risk of hematologic disease after space-radiation exposure. This risk may be particularly elevated following galactic cosmic ray exposure, which is omnipresent in deep space. Secondly, although individuals with hematopoietic PPM1D mutations may have an increased risk of clonal expansion following space radiation exposure, this does not appear to have consequences on long-term health outcomes. Thirdly, individuals with TET2 CH, particularly females, appear to be at risk of adverse outcomes regardless of space radiation exposure and thus are likely to be at risk even during ground-based work. Taken together, this work indicates that screening for the presence of CH driver mutations prior to space travel may be an additional tool to ensure astronaut health and safety during future deep-space missions.

Finally, the radiation-independent effects of CH drivers on survival provide insight into the impact of CH on all-cause mortality in the context of natural aging. As this study reached completion, mice were ∼22 months old, which is close to the lifespan of a laboratory mouse. Thus, our findings suggest that age-related CH may have mutation- and sex-specific associations with mortality, with TP53-associated CH conferring a greater effect in males and TET2-associated CH having a stronger effect in females. Although many studies have investigated the association between different CH drivers and disease,11,23,24,49 very few have examined the association between different driver mutations and all-cause mortality in the general population. Moreover, the sex-specific effects of CH on human longevity and disease have been largely overlooked, although recent work using murine models of CH suggests that different driver mutations confer sex-specific effects on cardiovascular disease development.50 Taken together, this work underscores the importance of considering sex-specific effects of CH that vary by driver-gene identity on all-cause mortality and disease.

In conclusion, space radiation can promote CH and impact the development of hematologic disease in a radiation-type, sex- and gene-specific manner. TP53-mediated CH appears to be particularly high risk for deep-space travel, where it is associated with clone expansion and consequent development of hematologic disease following radiation exposure, particularly in males. Screening for CH driver mutations may thus be a useful tool to ensure optimal astronaut health during future deep space missions.

Limitations of the study

We acknowledge that several limitations exist regarding our study. Firstly, most CH driver mutations affect only one allele, and for our Tet2 cohort we used donor bone marrow cells from mice with homozygous Tet2 deficiency. Nevertheless, we believe that this approach is still valid as previous reports by our lab suggest that mice with bone marrow transplants from homozygous Tet2-deficient animals yield a similar phenotype to those with Tet2-haploinsufficient cells.51 Secondly, as we were unable to determine a clear effect of CH on cardiac abnormalities, it is possible that groups may not have been sufficiently powered to detect subtle differences in cardiac function during aging, especially as some groups experienced significant mortality over the experimental time course. Thirdly, our hematopoietic LOY analysis of male mice was conducted on tissues taken at the terminal timepoint rather than intermittently during the experimental time course. It is therefore unclear whether mice transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells and exposed to radiation exhibited an earlier increase in LOY or whether LOY precipitated the development of hematologic disease in this cohort. Thus, additional studies are needed to better understand the relationship between TP53 mutations and LOY in hematologic disease and whether this relationship is modified by radiation exposure.

Resource availability

Lead contact

Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Kenneth Walsh, kw9ar@virginia.edu.

Materials availability

All unique materials and reagents will be available upon reasonable request to the lead contact.

Data and code availability

• Data: All data presented in this manuscript will be made available upon reasonable request by the lead contact.

• Code: This paper does not report original code.

• Any additional information: Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the United States 10.13039/100000104 National Aeronautics and Space Administration grant no. 80NSSC21K0549, the United States 10.13039/100000005 Department of Defense grant no. CA210887 and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant nos. AG092528, AG073249 and AG086508 to K.W. J.D.C. was supported by the NIH grant no. T32GM007267, Robert R. Wagner Fellowship Fund and iPRIME Student Fellowship. E.M.P. is a Scholar of Blood Cancer United (formerly the 10.13039/100005189 Leukemia and Lymphoma Society ) and was supported by NIH grant no. DK137183. Flow cytometric data presented in this manuscript were generated in the University of Virginia Flow Cytometry Core Facility (RRID:SCR_017829) and partially supported by the 10.13039/100000054 NCI grant no. (P30-CA044579). The histology data shown presented in this manuscript were generated with the assistance of the University of Virginia School of Medicine Research Histology Core Facility (RRID:SCR_025470). Some illustrations shown in this manuscript were created using Biorender.com.

Author contributions

Conceptualization, K.W. and D.A.G.; data curation, M.A.E., H.D., A.H.P., J.D.C., L.R.K., E.P., M.C.T., C.R.X., A.R.S., L.M., Y.Y., H.S., S.M., A.J.M., .S.C.S.J., and E.C.P.; formal analysis, M.A.E., H.D., A.H.P., J.D.C., L.R.K., E.P., C.R.X., A.R.S., S.C.S.J., E.C.P., and K.W.; funding acquisition, D.A.G. and K.W.; investigation, M.A.E., H.D., A.H.P., J.D.C., L.R.K., E.P., M.C.T., C.R.X., A.R.S., L.M., Y.Y., H.S., S.M., and S.C.S.J.; methodology, J.D.C., C.R.X., A.R.S., Y.Y., D.A.G., and K.W.; project administration, H.D. and K.W.; resources, G.P., A.F.D., and G.S.V.; supervision, D.A.G. and K.W.; writing – original draft, M.A.E., J.D.C., D.A.G., and K.W.; writing – review and editing, M.A.E., H.D., A.H.P., J.D.C., L.R.K., E.P., M.C.T., C.R.X., A.R.S., L.M., Y.Y., H.S., S.M., A.J.M., G.P., A.F.D., G.S.V., S.C.S.J., E.M.P., D.A.G., and K.W.

Declaration of interests

Authors declare no competing interests.

STAR★Methods

Key resources table

REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	
Antibodies	
	
HRP mouse anti-rabbit IgG	Santa Cruz	Cat No. sc-2357; RRID: AB_628497	
Anti-WIP1 (clone: D4F7)	Cell Signaling Technology	Cat No. 11901; RRID: AB_2797762	
PE-Cy7 Anti-CD45.1 (clone: A20) [blood]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 25-0453-82; RRID: AB_469629	
Brilliant-Violet 785 Anti-CD45.2 (clone: 104) [blood, bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 109839; RRID: AB_2562604	
PE Anti-CD115 (clone: AFS98) [blood]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No.12-1152-82; RRID: AB_465808	
PE-eFluor610 Anti-CD3e (clone: 145-2C11) [blood]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 61-0031-82; RRID: AB_2574514	
APC-Cy7 Anti-CD45R/B220 (clone: RA3-6B2) [blood]	BD Biosciences	Cat No. 552094; RRID: AB_394335	
APC Anti-Ly6C (clone: AL-21) [blood]	BD Biosciences	Cat No. 560595; RRID: AB_1727554	
PerCP-Cy5.5 Anti-Ly6G (clone: 1A8) [blood]	BD Biosciences	Cat No. 560602; RRID: AB_1727563	
FITC Anti-CD4 (clone: RM4-5) [blood]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 50-938-2; RRID: AB_464897	
Brilliant Violet 510 Anti-CD8a (clone: 53–6.7) [blood]	BioLegend	Cat No, 100751; RRID: AB_2563057	
Biotin anti-CD11b (clone: M1/70) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 133307; RRID: AB_11124348	
Biotin anti-Gr1 (clone: RB6-8C5) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 133307; RRID: AB_11124348	
Biotin anti-Ter119 (clone: Ter119) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 133307; RRID: AB_11124348	
Biotin anti-B220 (clone: RA3-6B2) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 133307; RRID: AB_11124348	
Biotin anti-CD3e (clone:145-2C11) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 135006; RRID: AB_11124348	
Biotin anti-CD127 (clone: A7R34) [bone marrow 1]	BioLegend	Cat No. 135006; RRID: AB_11124348	
PerCP-eFluor™ 710 anti-CD150 (clone: mShad150) [bone marrow 2]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 46-1502-82; RRID: AB_2016699	
PE-Cy7 anti-Sca1 (clone: D7) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 108113; RRID: AB_493596	
APC anti-C-kit (clone:2B8) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 105812; RRID: AB_313221	
BV421 anti-CD48 (clone: HM48-1) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 103427; RRID: AB_10895922	
Alexa 700 anti-CD45.1 (clone: A20) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 110724; RRID: AB_493733	
APC-Cy7 anti-CD16/32 (clone: 93) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 101327; RRID: AB_1967102	
FITC anti-CD34 (clone: RAM34) [bone marrow 2]	eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 11-0341-81; RRID: AB_465020	
PE anti-CD135 (clone: A2F10) [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 135305; RRID: AB_1877218	
	
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins	
	
RPMI 1640 media	Gibco ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 11875093	
Fetal bovine serum	Cytiva, HyClone™, Fisher Scientific	Cat No. SH3008803HI	
Penicillin Streptomycin	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 15-140-122	
Mouse macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF)	Peprotech, Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 315-02	
Protease inhibitor cocktail	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 87786	
Blue protein loading dye	New England Biolabs	Cat No. B7703S	
Amersham ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent	Cytiva	Cat No. RPN2232	
Streptavidin BV650 [bone marrow 2]	BioLegend	Cat No. 423102	
Zombie Aqua Fixable Viability Stain	BioLegend	Cat No. 423101	
eBioscience 1 × RBC lysis buffer	Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. 00-4333-57	
Bovine serum albumin	Millipore Aldrich	Cat No. A9418-50G	
0.01M phosphate buffered saline (PBS); pH 7.4	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 10010023	
BD Cytofix fixation buffer	BD Biosciences	Cat No. BD554655	
123count eBeads Counting Beads	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 01-1234-42	
RNAlater™ Stabilization Solution	ThermoFisher Scientific	Cat No. AM7020	
	
Critical commercial assays	
	
Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat No. 23227	
DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit	Qiagen	Cat No. 69506	
	
Experimental models: Organisms/strains	
	
Tet2-deficient mice (B6(Cg)-Tet2tm1.2Rao/J)	Jackson Laboratories	Stock ID: 23359;
RRID: IMSR_JAX:023359	
Trp53 mutant mice (129S-Trp53tm3Tyj/J)	Jackson Laboratories	Stock ID: 008651
RRID: IMSR_JAX:008651	
Ppm1d mutant mice (Ppm1dem1(IMPC)Wts)	Donating Investigator: G.S. Vassiliou	N/A	
C57BL/6 congenic Pep Boy mice (B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ)	Jackson Laboratories	Stock ID: 002014; RRID:IMSR_JAX:002014	
	
Oligonucleotides	
	
Primers	N/A	Table S8	
	
Software and algorithms	
	
ImageJ	NIH	https://imagej.net/ij/	
FlowJo software	Tree Star Inc.	https://www.flowjo.com/; RRID:SCR_008520	
Vevo Lab Software	Visual Sonics Fujifilm	https://www.visualsonics.com/product/software/vevo-lab	
GraphPad Prism Version 10.0	GraphPad Prism Inc.	https://www.graphpad.com/; RRID:SCR_002798	
Biorender	Biorender	https://app.biorender.com/; RRID:SCR_018361	
	
Other	
	
137Cesium-source irradiator	Shepherd Associates	N/A	
BD LSRFortessa Cell Analyzer	BD Biosciences	RRID:SCR_017829	
Element HT5 Veterinary Hematology Analyzer	Heska (now Antech)	Cat No. 5200	
Aurora Northern Lights Spectral Flow Cytometer	Cytek Biosciences	RRID:SCR_017829	
Vevo 2100 Ultrasound	Visual Sonics, Fujifilm	RRID:SCR_015816	
QIAcuity digital PCR system	Qiagen	Cat No. 911001	

Experimental model and study participant details

Animals

All animal procedures were approved by the University of Virginia Animal Use and Care Committee (protocol number 4336) and Brookhaven National Laboratories Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol number 519). All experiments adhered to the ethical guidelines outlined by both committees. C57BL/6J background Tet2-deficient, Trp53R270H mice and C57BL/6 congenic Pep Boy mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (key resources table). Ppm1d1451delT constitutive knock-in mice were generated at Wellcome Sanger Institute using CRISPR-Cas9 editing of mouse zygotes to introduce a premature stop codon in exon 6 of Ppm1d by homologous recombination (allele ID: Ppm1dem1(IMPC)Wts) (Figure S19A). The mutation is a deletion of thymine 1430 of mouse Ppm1d (c.1430delT, GRCm38/Chr11:85345826delT) and corresponds to c.1451delT (p.L484∗) of human PPM1D. These mice have been given the international strain name C57BL/6N-Ppm1dem1(IMPC)Wtsi/WtsiCnbc.

Breeding colonies of mutant strains were maintained at the University of Virginia animal vivarium and mutant mice were obtained from heterozygous breeding pairs. Mice were housed in specific pathogen–free cages, under a 14 h light/10 h dark cycle and had free access to water and food pellets. Experiments were performed using both male and female mice. For experiments, Trp53 and Ppm1d mutant mice were used in the heterozygous state, while Tet2-deficient mice were homozygous. All experimental animals were monitored daily, and body weight was recorded monthly. Mice received veterinary assessment and intervention if they exhibited dyspnea, marked lethargy, body weight loss exceeding 20%, or tumors larger than 20 mm in diameter. Those that failed to improve following intervention were considered to have reached a humane endpoint and were subsequently euthanized.

Genotyping of mutant mice

Genotyping for Tet2-deficient mice was performed according to Jackson Laboratories standard protocols using primers shown in Table S8. Trp53R270H mice were genotyped by Sanger sequencing (Azenta Life Sciences) to detect the presence of the point mutation. Genotyping of C57BL/6N-Ppm1dem1(IMPC)Wtsi/WtsiCnbc mice was performed by Afl-II endonuclease-based PCR to detect wild-type (WT) and mutant alleles. Genotyping primer sequences shown in Table S8. The WT allele was detected at 351 bp, while the mutant was detected at 141 and 209 bp since 1430T deletion generates a target sequence for the restriction enzyme Afl-II (CTTAAG). Heterozygotes were detected at 141, 209 and 351 bp (Figure S19B).

Adoptive transfer bone marrow transplantation model of clonal hematopoiesis

For these studies we sought to use a model of CH which avoids lethal radiation, which could conceivably lead to confounding effects while studying the effects of space radiation on long term health outcomes. To achieve this, we used an adoptive transfer bone marrow transplantation (BMT) approach which has been previously described in detail.22,51,52 Bone marrow cells were isolated from femurs, tibias, humeri and pelvises of mutant (Trp53R270H/+, Ppm1dem1(IMPC)Wtsi/+ and Tet2−/−) and WT donor mice of both sexes (age 6–14 weeks). Once isolated, bone marrow cells were resuspended in RPMI 1640 media (key resources table) at a concentration of 2.5 × 107 cells per mL. Male and female C57BL/6 background CD45.1+ Pep Boy mice (∼10 weeks old) were transplanted with suspensions of donor bone marrow containing either 100% WT or 100% mutant cells of their respective sex. Transplants were performed over 3 consecutive days, where recipient mice received 5 × 106 unfractionated bone marrow cells in 200 μL of media via the retro-orbital vein daily (1.5 × 107 cells in total).

Method details

Irradiation procedures

At ∼2 months post-adoptive transfer (∼4 months of age), recipient mice were shipped to Brookhaven National Laboratories for radiation. Mice were assigned to one of four groups: no irradiation, gamma radiation, solar particle event simulation (SPEsim), simplified galactic cosmic ray simulation (simGCRsim). Radiation doses were as follows for the radiation types: gamma (1 Gy), SPEsim (1 Gy), simGCRsim (1 Gy; 500 MeV/n). Dose/rates for gamma and simGCRsim radiation are shown in Table S9 for each individual mouse cohort. When the radiation beam was available, mice were placed in aerated plastic boxes (5′×3′×2′; L×W×H), with each box holding between one and three mice. The boxes were subsequently placed in Styrofoam holders, taken to the target room, placed on the beamline platform and irradiated with the beam. Following radiation, mice were placed back in their home cages and returned to the animal facility following release from the liaison physicist. Following release, mice were shipped back to the University of Virginia vivarium for the remainder of the study.

Hematopoietic cell parameter and flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood

Peripheral blood was collected from all mice to evaluate levels of donor cell chimerism and assess hematological parameters. Samples were taken at baseline (4 weeks post-adoptive transplant and 3 months of age), at specified intervals throughout the experiment and following termination. During the experiment, peripheral blood samples were obtained from the retroorbital plexus using heparin-coated capillary tubes and following termination, samples were obtained from the inferior vena cava. Samples were collected in K2EDTA-added microtainer blood collection tubes. Hematopoietic parameters were analyzed using the Element HT5 Veterinary Hematology Analyzer according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Heska, key resources table). Hematopoietic parameters were classified as normal, above range or below range based on the reference range provided by the manufacturer for a standard laboratory mouse (Table S10). To confirm successful transplantation of donor cells and determine levels of mutant clone expansion, flow cytometry was performed on peripheral blood. To prepare samples, red blood cells (RBCs) were lysed using eBioscience 1 × RBC lysis buffer (key resources table) for 8 min on ice, with intermittent vortexing. After washing with FACS buffer (0.5% bovine serum albumin in 0.01M PBS), cells were stained with antibodies listed in the key resources table as indicated by [blood] for 20 min, in the dark at room temperature. Subsequently, cells were fixed with Cytofix fixation buffer (key resources table) for 15 min, in the dark, at 4 °C. Samples were washed, resuspended in FACS buffer and stored at 4 °C in the dark until sample acquisition. Samples were acquired on a BD LSRFortessa Cell Analyzer (key resources table) and data were analyzed using FlowJo software (key resources table). Leukocyte populations were identified by the following surface markers: total WBCs (CD45+); neutrophils, (CD45+CD115loLy6G+); Ly6Chi monocytes (CD45+CD115hiLy6G−Ly6Chi); Ly6Clo monocytes (CD45+CD115hiLy6G−Ly6Clo); B cells (CD45+CD115−CD3-B220+); CD8+ T cells, (CD45+CD115−B220-CD3+CD8+), CD4+ T cells (CD45+CD115−B220-CD3+CD4+).

Tissue harvest

At the conclusion of the study or once mice reached a humane endpoint, animals were euthanized by isoflurane overdose, and blood was collected from the inferior vena cava. Mice were then perfused with 8 mL of ice-cold 0.01M PBS via the right ventricle followed by 2 mL via the left ventricle. After perfusion, the following organs were harvested: lymph nodes, heart, lungs, thymus, tibias and femurs (for bone marrow), liver, spleen, kidneys, and brain. Except for brains, which were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, tissues were dissected or sectioned and placed in either 10% neutral-buffered formalin or RNAlater (key resources table) for downstream analyses. Mice were also examined for the presence of tumors, which, if identified, were excised and fixed in formalin. Samples in formalin were stored at room temperature until paraffin embedding, whereas RNAlater-preserved tissues were stored at −80 °C until use.

Histology

Formalin-fixed tissues were dehydrated, embedded in paraffin wax, and sectioned at a thickness of 5 μm. Prior to staining, sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through a series of decreasing ethanol concentrations. Slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and examined by light microscopy. Histopathological evaluation was performed by a single board-certified veterinary pathologist. Representative images were captured at ×10 and ×20 magnification by light microscopy.

Splenic DNA isolation and digital PCR

Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated from spleen tissue preserved in RNAlater using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (key resources table) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LOY was determined by digital PCR (dPCR) using the Qiagen QIAcuity digital PCR system (key resources table). This uses a TaqMan™-based approach to determine the relative abundance of Y chromosomes in each sample by comparing amplification of the Usp9y gene (Table S8) on the Y chromosome to that of Tert (Table S8) on chromosome 13. LOY was calculated as LOY=(1–2∗[Usp9y]/[Tert])∗100%.

Quantification and statistical analyses

Each experimental group was designed with a sample size of n = 6 mice. Datasets with fewer than n = 6 (as indicated by a range in the figure legends) reflect mortality occurring prior to the relevant endpoint. Except for the Ppm1d female cohort where n = 3 mice died shortly after adoptive bone marrow transplantation. Reflecting these deaths, starting group sizes for no irradiation groups were WT: n = 5 and mutant: n = 4. All other groups in this cohort were n = 6. Most data were expressed as mean ± SEM or as median values, as appropriate. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 10. For analyses of cell chimerism, group differences were assessed using two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test. Survival was analyzed using the log rank (Mantel–Cox) test, and when analyses involved eight groups, p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) procedure. To identify groups exhibiting substantial loss of the Y chromosome (LOY), one-sample t-tests and Wilcoxon tests were performed, with substantial LOY defined as a mean percentage significantly above zero. To compare percentage LOY between mice transplanted with WT cells and those transplanted with Trp53 mutant cells, regardless of radiation type, a Student’s unpaired t test was performed. Blood cell parameters were compared using two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons test. For longitudinal echocardiography, groups were compared to their own baseline values using two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s or Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test, as appropriate. Statistical significance was accepted if p values or adjusted p values, where appropriate, were <0.05.

Supplemental information

Document S1. Figures S1–S19, Tables S1–S10, and supplementary methods

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.116877.


References

1 Dainiak N. Hematologic consequences of exposure to ionizing radiation Exp. Hematol. 30 2002 513 528 10.1016/s0301-472x(02)00802-0 12063018
2 Hollingsworth B.A. Aldrich J.T. Case C.M. Jr. DiCarlo A.L. Hoffman C.M. Jakubowski A.A. Liu Q. Loelius S.G. PrabhuDas M. Winters T.A. Cassatt D.R. Immune Dysfunction from Radiation Exposure Radiat. Res. 200 2023 396 416 10.1667/rade-22-00004.1 38152282 PMC10751071
3 Garrett-Bakelman F.E. Darshi M. Green S.J. Gur R.C. Lin L. Macias B.R. McKenna M.J. Meydan C. Mishra T. Nasrini J. The NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight Science 364 2019 eaau8650 10.1126/science.aau8650 PMC7580864 30975860
4 Evans M.A. Walsh K. Clonal hematopoiesis, somatic mosaicism, and age-associated disease Physiol. Rev. 103 2023 649 716 10.1152/physrev.00004.2022 36049115 PMC9639777
5 Jaiswal S. Fontanillas P. Flannick J. Manning A. Grauman P.V. Mar B.G. Lindsley R.C. Mermel C.H. Burtt N. Chavez A. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated with adverse outcomes N. Engl. J. Med. 371 2014 2488 2498 10.1056/NEJMoa1408617 25426837 PMC4306669
6 Young A.L. Challen G.A. Birmann B.M. Druley T.E. Clonal haematopoiesis harbouring AML-associated mutations is ubiquitous in healthy adults Nat. Commun. 7 2016 12484 10.1038/ncomms12484 PMC4996934 27546487
7 Genovese G. Kähler A.K. Handsaker R.E. Lindberg J. Rose S.A. Bakhoum S.F. Chambert K. Mick E. Neale B.M. Fromer M. Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer risk inferred from blood DNA sequence N. Engl. J. Med. 371 2014 2477 2487 10.1056/NEJMoa1409405 25426838 PMC4290021
8 Coombs C.C. Zehir A. Devlin S.M. Kishtagari A. Syed A. Jonsson P. Hyman D.M. Solit D.B. Robson M.E. Baselga J. Therapy-Related Clonal Hematopoiesis in Patients with Non-hematologic Cancers Is Common and Associated with Adverse Clinical Outcomes Cell Stem Cell 21 2017 374 382.e4 10.1016/j.stem.2017.07.010 28803919 PMC5591073
9 Bolton K.L. Ptashkin R.N. Gao T. Braunstein L. Devlin S.M. Kelly D. Patel M. Berthon A. Syed A. Yabe M. Cancer therapy shapes the fitness landscape of clonal hematopoiesis Nat. Genet. 52 2020 1219 1226 10.1038/s41588-020-00710-0 33106634 PMC7891089
10 Steensma D.P. Bejar R. Jaiswal S. Lindsley R.C. Sekeres M.A. Hasserjian R.P. Ebert B.L. Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential and its distinction from myelodysplastic syndromes Blood 126 2015 9 16 10.1182/blood-2015-03-631747 25931582 PMC4624443
11 Jaiswal S. Natarajan P. Silver A.J. Gibson C.J. Bick A.G. Shvartz E. McConkey M. Gupta N. Gabriel S. Ardissino D. Clonal Hematopoiesis and Risk of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease N. Engl. J. Med. 377 2017 111 121 10.1056/NEJMoa1701719 28636844 PMC6717509
12 Fuster J.J. MacLauchlan S. Zuriaga M.A. Polackal M.N. Ostriker A.C. Chakraborty R. Wu C.L. Sano S. Muralidharan S. Rius C. Clonal hematopoiesis associated with TET2 deficiency accelerates atherosclerosis development in mice Science 355 2017 842 847 10.1126/science.aag1381 28104796 PMC5542057
13 Sano S. Oshima K. Wang Y. MacLauchlan S. Katanasaka Y. Sano M. Zuriaga M.A. Yoshiyama M. Goukassian D. Cooper M.A. Tet2-Mediated Clonal Hematopoiesis Accelerates Heart Failure Through a Mechanism Involving the IL-1beta/NLRP3 Inflammasome J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 71 2018 875 886 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.037 29471939 PMC5828038
14 Evans M.A. Walsh K. Clonal Hematopoiesis in Cancer and Cardiovascular Disease: JACC: CardioOncology State-of-the-Art Review JACC CardioOncology 7 2025 470 495 10.1016/j.jaccao.2025.06.006 40841103 PMC12441633
15 Bick A.G. Pirruccello J.P. Griffin G.K. Gupta N. Gabriel S. Saleheen D. Libby P. Kathiresan S. Natarajan P. Genetic Interleukin 6 Signaling Deficiency Attenuates Cardiovascular Risk in Clonal Hematopoiesis Circulation 141 2020 124 131 10.1161/circulationaha.119.044362 31707836 PMC7008855
16 Honigberg M.C. Zekavat S.M. Niroula A. Griffin G.K. Bick A.G. Pirruccello J.P. Nakao T. Whitsel E.A. Farland L.V. Laurie C. Premature Menopause, Clonal Hematopoiesis, and Coronary Artery Disease in Postmenopausal Women Circulation 143 2021 410 423 10.1161/circulationaha.120.051775 33161765 PMC7911856
17 Chen S. Wang Q. Yu H. Capitano M.L. Vemula S. Nabinger S.C. Gao R. Yao C. Kobayashi M. Geng Z. Mutant p53 drives clonal hematopoiesis through modulating epigenetic pathway Nat. Commun. 10 2019 5649 10.1038/s41467-019-13542-2 31827082 PMC6906427
18 Crants S.A. Olson S.S. Li Y. Bejan C.A. Vlasschaert C. Mack T.M. Pershad Y. Kishtagari A. Reed S.C. Croessmann S. Clonal Hematopoiesis of Indeterminate Potential After Radiation Therapy Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 124 2026 1042 1050 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2025.10.006 41138783 PMC13339994
19 Brojakowska A. Kour A. Thel M.C. Park E. Bisserier M. Garikipati V.N.S. Hadri L. Mills P.J. Walsh K. Goukassian D.A. Retrospective analysis of somatic mutations and clonal hematopoiesis in astronauts Commun. Biol. 5 2022 828 10.1038/s42003-022-03777-z 35978153 PMC9385668
20 Mencia-Trinchant N. MacKay M.J. Chin C. Afshinnekoo E. Foox J. Meydan C. Butler D. Mozsary C. Vernice N.A. Darby C. Clonal hematopoiesis before, during, and after human spaceflight Cell Rep. 34 2021 108740 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108740 33567281
21 Werneth C.M. Patel Z.S. Thompson M.S. Blattnig S.R. Huff J.L. Considering clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential in space radiation risk analysis for hematologic cancers and cardiovascular disease Commun. Med. 4 2024 105 10.1038/s43856-023-00408-4 38862635 PMC11166645
22 Wang Y. Sano S. Yura Y. Ke Z. Sano M. Oshima K. Ogawa H. Horitani K. Min K.D. Miura-Yura E. Tet2-mediated clonal hematopoiesis in nonconditioned mice accelerates age-associated cardiac dysfunction JCI Insight 5 2020 e135204 10.1172/jci.insight.135204 PMC7213793 32154790
23 Ezzat D. Uddin M.M. Xue L. Pershad Y. Zhang S. Collins J.M. Kitzman J.O. Jaiswal S. Desai P. Kooperberg C. Clonal Hematopoiesis and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Older Women J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 86 2025 1093 1106 10.1016/j.jacc.2025.07.058 40864016 PMC12557340
24 Saadatagah S. Naderian M. Uddin M. Dikilitas O. Niroula A. Schuermans A. Selvin E. Hoogeveen R.C. Matsushita K. Nambi V. Atrial Fibrillation and Clonal Hematopoiesis in TET2 and ASXL1 JAMA Cardiol. 9 2024 497 506 10.1001/jamacardio.2024.0459 38598228 PMC11007653
25 Schuermans A. Honigberg M.C. Raffield L.M. Yu B. Roberts M.B. Kooperberg C. Desai P. Carson A.P. Shah A.M. Ballantyne C.M. Clonal Hematopoiesis and Incident Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction JAMA Netw. Open 7 2024 e2353244 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.53244 PMC10811556 38270950
26 Sano S. Wang Y. Ogawa H. Horitani K. Sano M. Polizio A.H. Kour A. Yura Y. Doviak H. Walsh K. TP53-mediated therapy-related clonal hematopoiesis contributes to doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy by augmenting a neutrophil-mediated cytotoxic response JCI Insight 6 2021 e146076 10.1172/jci.insight.146076 PMC8410064 34236050
27 Jafri S. Moore S.D. Morrell N.W. Ormiston M.L. A sex-specific reconstitution bias in the competitive CD45.1/CD45.2 congenic bone marrow transplant model Sci. Rep. 7 2017 3495 10.1038/s41598-017-03784-9 28615666 PMC5471196
28 Ahmadi S.E. Rahimian E. Rahimi S. Zarandi B. Bahraini M. Soleymani M. Safdari S.M. Shabannezhad A. Jaafari N. Safa M. From regulation to deregulation of p53 in hematologic malignancies: implications for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy Biomark. Res. 12 2024 137 10.1186/s40364-024-00676-9 39538363 PMC11565275
29 Santini V. Stahl M. Sallman D.A. TP53 Mutations in Acute Leukemias and Myelodysplastic Syndromes: Insights and Treatment Updates Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 44 2024 e432650 38768424 10.1200/EDBK_432650
30 Hernández Borrero L.J. El-Deiry W.S. Tumor suppressor p53: Biology, signaling pathways, and therapeutic targeting Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Canc 1876 2021 188556 10.1016/j.bbcan.2021.188556 PMC8730328 33932560
31 Haupt S. Caramia F. Herschtal A. Soussi T. Lozano G. Chen H. Liang H. Speed T.P. Haupt Y. Identification of cancer sex-disparity in the functional integrity of p53 and its X chromosome network Nat. Commun. 10 2019 5385 10.1038/s41467-019-13266-3 31772231 PMC6879765
32 Dawoud A.A.Z. Tapper W.J. Cross N.C.P. Age-related loss of chromosome Y is associated with levels of sex hormone binding globulin and clonal hematopoiesis defined by TET2, TP53, and CBL mutations Sci. Adv. 9 2023 eade9746 10.1126/sciadv.ade9746 PMC10121166 37083525
33 Müller P. Velazquez Camacho O. Yazbeck A.M. Wölwer C. Zhai W. Schumacher J. Heider D. Buettner R. Quaas A. Hillmer A.M. Why loss of Y? A pan-cancer genome analysis of tumors with loss of Y chromosome Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 21 2023 1573 1583 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.02.024 36874157 PMC9978323
34 Qi M. Pang J. Mitsiades I. Lane A.A. Rheinbay E. Loss of chromosome Y in primary tumors Cell 186 2023 3125 3136.e11 10.1016/j.cell.2023.06.006 37385248
35 Forsberg L.A. Rasi C. Malmqvist N. Davies H. Pasupulati S. Pakalapati G. Sandgren J. de Ståhl T.D. Zaghlool A. Giedraitis V. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y in peripheral blood is associated with shorter survival and higher risk of cancer Nat. Genet. 46 2014 624 628 10.1038/ng.2966 24777449 PMC5536222
36 Noveski P. Madjunkova S. Sukarova Stefanovska E. Matevska Geshkovska N. Kuzmanovska M. Dimovski A. Plaseska-Karanfilska D. Loss of Y Chromosome in Peripheral Blood of Colorectal and Prostate Cancer Patients PLoS One 11 2016 e0146264 10.1371/journal.pone.0146264 PMC4706411 26745889
37 Asim A. Agarwal S. Avasthi K.K. Sureka S. Rastogi N. Dean D.D. Mohindra S. Investigation of LOY in Prostate, Pancreatic, and Colorectal Cancers in males: A case-control study Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 20 2020 1259 1263 10.1080/14737159.2020.1853528 33210965
38 Zhou W. Machiela M.J. Freedman N.D. Rothman N. Malats N. Dagnall C. Caporaso N. Teras L.T. Gaudet M.M. Gapstur S.M. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y is associated with common variation near TCL1A Nat. Genet. 48 2016 563 568 10.1038/ng.3545 27064253 PMC4848121
39 Loftfield E. Zhou W. Yeager M. Chanock S.J. Freedman N.D. Machiela M.J. Mosaic Y Loss Is Moderately Associated with Solid Tumor Risk Cancer Res. 79 2019 461 466 10.1158/0008-5472.Can-18-2566 30510122 PMC6359954
40 Kobayashi T. Hachiya T. Ikehata Y. Horie S. Genetic association of mosaic loss of chromosome Y with prostate cancer in men of European and East Asian ancestries: a Mendelian randomization study Front. Aging 4 2023 1176451 10.3389/fragi.2023.1176451 PMC10264619 37323536
41 Zhang Q. Zhao L. Yang Y. Li S. Liu Y. Chen C. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y promotes leukemogenesis and clonal hematopoiesis JCI Insight 7 2022 e153768 10.1172/jci.insight.153768 PMC8855789 35132955
42 Zhou W. Chen G. Gong D. Li Y. Huang S. Wang N. Xu Q. Xiong Q. Jing Y. Lv N. Loss of the Y chromosome predicts a high relapse risk in younger adult male patients with t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia on high-dose cytarabine consolidation therapy: a retrospective multicenter study Leuk. Lymphoma 61 2020 820 830 10.1080/10428194.2019.1683734 31724463
43 Schlenk R.F. Benner A. Krauter J. Büchner T. Sauerland C. Ehninger G. Schaich M. Mohr B. Niederwieser D. Krahl R. Individual patient data-based meta-analysis of patients aged 16 to 60 years with core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia: a survey of the German Acute Myeloid Leukemia Intergroup J. Clin. Oncol. 22 2004 3741 3750 10.1200/jco.2004.03.012 15289486
44 Sano S. Horitani K. Ogawa H. Halvardson J. Chavkin N.W. Wang Y. Sano M. Mattisson J. Hata A. Danielsson M. Hematopoietic loss of Y chromosome leads to cardiac fibrosis and heart failure mortality Science 377 2022 292 297 10.1126/science.abn3100 35857592 PMC9437978
45 Chen X. Shen Y. Choi S. Abdel-Hafiz H.A. Basu M. Hoelzen L. Tufano M. Kailasam Mani S.K. Ranjpour M. Zhu J. Concurrent loss of the Y chromosome in cancer and T cells impacts outcome Nature 642 2025 1041 1050 10.1038/s41586-025-09071-2 40468066 PMC12221978
46 Arai Y. Chavkin N.W. Arai Y. Halvardson J. Bjurling J. Doviak H. Cochran J.D. Evans M.A. Horitani K. Yura Y. Hematopoietic loss of Y chromosome activates immune checkpoints and contributes to impaired senescent cell clearance and renal disease Sci. Transl. Med. 17 2025 eadv4071 10.1126/scitranslmed.adv4071 PMC12683723 40768598
47 Tufail M. Jiang C.H. Li N. Immune evasion in cancer: mechanisms and cutting-edge therapeutic approaches Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 10 2025 227 10.1038/s41392-025-02280-1 40739089 PMC12311175
48 Yura Y. Miura-Yura E. Katanasaka Y. Min K.D. Chavkin N. Polizio A.H. Ogawa H. Horitani K. Doviak H. Evans M.A. The Cancer Therapy-Related Clonal Hematopoiesis Driver Gene Ppm1d Promotes Inflammation and Non-Ischemic Heart Failure in Mice Circ. Res. 129 2021 684 698 10.1161/circresaha.121.319314 34315245 PMC8409899
49 Yu B. Roberts M.B. Raffield L.M. Zekavat S.M. Nguyen N.Q.H. Biggs M.L. Brown M.R. Griffin G. Desai P. Correa A. Supplemental Association of Clonal Hematopoiesis With Incident Heart Failure J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 78 2021 42 52 10.1016/j.jacc.2021.04.085 34210413 PMC8313294
50 Carter P.R. Kitt L. Rodgers A.C. Figg N. Zhou A. Zhu C. Wang Z. Libby P. Burgess S. Vassiliou G.S. Clarke M.C.H. Common clonal haematopoiesis driver mutations have disparate effects on macrophage cytokines, clonal expansion and atherogenesis JCI Insight 11 2025 e200334 10.1172/jci.insight.200334 PMC12892922 41433101
51 Fuster J.J. Zuriaga M.A. Zorita V. MacLauchlan S. Polackal M.N. Viana-Huete V. Ferrer-Pérez A. Matesanz N. Herrero-Cervera A. Sano S. TET2-Loss-of-Function-Driven Clonal Hematopoiesis Exacerbates Experimental Insulin Resistance in Aging and Obesity Cell Rep. 33 2020 108326 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108326 PMC7856871 33113366
52 Park E. Evans M.A. Doviak H. Horitani K. Ogawa H. Yura Y. Wang Y. Sano S. Walsh K. Bone Marrow Transplantation Procedures in Mice to Study Clonal Hematopoiesis J. Vis. Exp. 2021 10.3791/61875 10.3791/61875 PMC8439117 34125083
