
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Int J Nurs Stud Adv
Journal ID: Int J Nurs Stud Adv
NLM Journal ID: 101769252

International Journal of Nursing Studies Advances

EISSN: 2666-142X
Publisher: Elsevier

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13499381
PMID: 42633365
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijnsa.2026.100644
Article ID: S2666-142X(26)00165-7
Article ID: 100644
Article version: 1
Subjects: Article

The cognitive work of acute care nurses: A hybrid model concept analysis

Benjamin Ellen ellen.benjamin@umb.edu a ⁎
Roman Jones Joanne a
Mueller Shelby a b
Menard Alexander c d
Gazarian Priscilla c
a Department of Nursing, Donna M. and Robert J. Manning College of Nursing and Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Boston, MA United States
b US Army Medical Center of Excellence, Ft. Sam, Houston, TX United States
c Tan Chingfen Graduate School of Nursing, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA United States
d UMass Memorial Medical Center, Department of Critical Care, Worcester, MA United States
⁎ Corresponding author at: Manning College of Nursing and Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston, MA United States. ellen.benjamin@umb.edu
Publication date: 2026 Dec
Electronic publication date: 2026 Jul 31
Volume: 11
Electronic Location ID: 100644
Received 2025 Dec 15; Revised 2026 Jul 24; Accepted 2026 Jul 30
Copyright: © 2026 The Authors
Copyright year: 2026
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/

Keywords: Clinical judgment, Cognitive Work, Concept Analysis, Critical thinking, Decision Making, Hybrid Model, Nursing

==============================
Objective

Nurses have long struggled to articulate the nature of their work, especially their mental work, which is complex, hidden, and intangible. The concept “cognitive work” describes the mental labor that nurses perform. Although nurses’ cognitive work is consequential to patient safety and care quality, it has lacked formal conceptual analysis. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to clarify the essential attributes and measurement of cognitive work among nurses in acute care settings.

Methods

A concept analysis was conducted in adherence to the Schwartz-Barcott and Kim hybrid methodology. This study was preregistered on Open Science Framework in April 2024 (https://osf.io/fgj4w). Literature published between 2001-2024 was systematically collected from three online databases. Article screening and data extraction were conducted in Covidence using a standardized extraction tool. A total of 23 articles met inclusion criteria. During the fieldwork phase, eight observations were conducted on a critical care unit in a large, academic medical center. Data were collected using field notes and a structured qualitative data collection tool. Theoretical and fieldwork analyses included the use of inductive and deductive codes, which were clustered into emergent categories. In the final analysis phase, all findings were integrated into a final conceptual definition.

Results

Nursing cognitive work is a concept that is rising in use across interdisciplinary scholarship. Nurses’ cognitive work is shaped and constrained by personal, environmental, organizational, and technological factors, and encompasses thinking across multiple dimensions to support clinical work, care orchestration, and relational work. Results highlight the breadth and complexity of nurses’ cognitive work, which includes absorbing and interpreting information, reasoning and forming clinical judgements, managing attention and multiple demands, problem-solving, prospective thinking, and accumulating knowledge over time.

Conclusion

Nursing cognitive work arises from nurses’ existing knowledge, available information, and cognitive capacity. It is characterized by complex, nonlinear, dynamic, and multidimensional cognitive processes. Cognitive work has consequences for the development of nursing knowledge and expertise, nurses’ mental strain and emotional exhaustion, and nurses’ ability to provide safe, high-quality, efficient care, and support a positive working environment. The concept “cognitive work” is well-suited to reflect the breadth and complexity of nurse thinking, and it can be formally analyzed using a variety of measurement approaches. This definition may support future advances in nursing theory, research, and practice.

What is already known

• Nurses’ mental work is critical to promote patient safety and well-being within a healthcare system characterized by rising complexity and limited resources.

• The concept “cognitive work” is emerging in nursing literature but has lacked formal analysis within the context of acute care nursing.

Alt-text: Unlabelled box dummy alt text

What this paper adds

• This paper draws from literature and fieldwork to characterize the antecedents, consequences, characteristics, dimensions, and complex mental processes that comprise nurses’ cognitive work.

• Conceptual clarity may inform advancements in nursing theory, analysis, and strategies to support nurse cognitive work.

Alt-text: Unlabelled box dummy alt text

1 Introduction

Today’s healthcare system is incredibly complex. Nurses face the challenges of providing care to a diverse and aging population, managing increasingly complex medical and mental health conditions, and integrating new technology (National Academy of Medicine, 2021). The healthcare system is also characterized by unequal access to preventative care that places high burdens on acute care settings, financial constraints, and severe healthcare professional shortages (Chervoni-Knapp, 2022; Dickman et al., 2017).

Within this setting, nurses play a crucial role in the protection of, and advocacy for, patients. Nurses represent the largest sector of healthcare professionals and are intimately involved throughout all stages of patient care (Rosseter, 2026). Nurses bear the frontline responsibilities of assessing and monitoring patients, administering treatments, coordinating services, and advancing care trajectories (Lee and Jang, 2023). Bedside nurses also frequently present the last opportunity to prevent serious medical errors and adverse safety events (Lee and Jang, 2023; Patel and Goldin, 2026).

Safe nursing practice relies on nurses’ professional knowledge, critical thinking, and clinical judgement (Falcó-Pegueroles et al., 2021; Stenseth et al., 2022). The mental component of nursing work can be described as nurses’ “cognitive work.” Cognitive work is an interdisciplinary concept that has been a focus of human factors and cognitive engineering, but has not yet formally been evaluated within nursing (Jackson et al., 2021; Khullar, 2023). Given the urgency to support and promote high-quality and safe nursing care, the time is right to clarify the meaning of nurses’ cognitive work.

2 Background

The nursing profession has long struggled to articulate the meaning and nature of its work (Jackson et al., 2021). In the nineteenth and early twentieth century, public discourse and imagery emphasized nursing as a virtuous, caring profession dedicated to the service of others (Gordon and Nelson, 2006). Facing cultural and gender norms that restricted women’s education and professional work, nurses downplayed their intellect and professional knowledge, instead emphasizing other virtues such as sacrifice, altruism, devotion, and servitude (Gordon and Nelson, 2006; Rodgers, 2011). Even today, public media and nursing discourse continue to highlight nurses’ kindness and virtue over their scientific knowledge. Where nursing work is described, it tends to emphasize discrete nursing tasks and actions, what nurses “do,” rather than what nurses’ know or how they think (Gordon and Nelson, 2006; Jackson et al., 2021; Rodgers, 2011). Scholars have argued that such framing and discourse have historically undermined nurses’ ability to articulate the importance, value, and complexity of their mental work (Gordon and Nelson, 2006).

Efforts to articulate and develop the knowledge of nursing became prominent in the 1960s-1980s, when there were significant advances in nursing education, research, and the science of nursing (Rodgers, 2011). The nursing process arose as an early structured framework to describe nursing work, followed by growing emphasis on nurses’ clinical reasoning and clinical judgement (Doyon and Raymond, 2025; Jessee, 2021). Clinical reasoning and judgment are now embraced as foundations of nursing practice (Doyon and Raymond, 2025). Despite this rise in recognition for the importance of nurses’ thinking processes, empirical evidence assessing the impact of nursing judgment on patient care outcomes remains limited, impeding wider recognition of the significance of nursing knowledge and mental work (Falcó-Pegueroles et al., 2021; Zuriguel Pérez et al., 2015).

Even within nursing, there are inconsistencies and debates surrounding the characterization of nursing work. Academic descriptions of nursing work have been criticized for poorly matching the frontline realities of daily nursing practice (Allen, 2007; Jackson et al., 2021). Several scholars have argued that the profession’s nearly-singular focus on bedside clinical activities has failed to capture the true breadth and multidimensionality of nursing (Allen, 2015a, 2015b; Jackson et al., 2021). In a recent effort to address these concerns, Jackson et al. (2021) conducted a meta-narrative review to develop a new model of nursing work; they identified four domains: physical, emotional, organizational, and cognitive work.

Among all aspects of nursing work, cognitive work is especially hard to illuminate because it is intangible, hidden, and complex (Rodgers, 2011). Foundational research by Potter et al. helped establish “cognitive work” as a significant concept to nursing, but did not offer a conceptual definition (Potter et al., 2005a; 2005b). Jackson et al. (2021) describe nurses’ cognitive work as the mental work that nurses perform, including the four sub-themes of learning, thinking, stacking, and cognitive load. Their preliminary analysis argues for the usefulness of this concept to describe nurses’ thinking processes alongside the demands of their mental labor (Jackson et al., 2021).

Although the terms clinical reasoning, clinical judgement, and critical thinking have been well explored in nursing literature and are connected to prominent nursing theoretical models (Benner, 1984; Tanner, 2006), they do not emphasize the complexity of today’s practice environment or its constraints on nurses’ cognitive work. Inpatient nursing occurs in an environment with high patient acuity, shorter hospital stays, and advanced technologies. This complex work environment has been described as turbulent, meaning that it is characterized by unanticipated work complexities, interruptions, distractions, cognitive stacking, and multiple simultaneous demands (Browne and Braden, 2020; Jennings et al., 2022). Turbulence is associated with increased nursing workload and threats to patient safety, suggesting that reducing nurses’ cognitive burdens is essential for improving patient outcomes. In fact, safety literature has long recognized the importance of workers’ “non-technical skills,” including cognitive processing, to safety and error prevention (Flin and O’Connor, 2017). Although these nontechnical skills, such as situation awareness, decision-making, communication, and task management, are essential to effective nursing practice, they are often implicit rather than explicitly acknowledged (Marshall and Finlayson, 2018). Collectively, such scholarship supports the argument for a clearer understanding of nurses’ cognitive work to enhance nurses' ability to provide safe, high-quality care.

Nevertheless, the fundamental meaning and nature of nursing cognitive work remains poorly understood, and a formal definition is lacking (Rodgers, 2011; Jackson et al., 2021; Jennings et al., 2022). Growing concerns over the competency and preparedness of nurses to manage the realities of a highly complex, acute, and overburdened healthcare system have underscored the need for strategies to more comprehensively describe, measure, evaluate, and support nurses’ cognitive work (Allen, 2015a; National Academy of Medicine, 2021). A rigorous, empirically based conceptual analysis of nurse cognitive work is an essential step towards supporting these efforts. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to describe the meaning of “cognitive work” among nurses in acute care settings using a Hybrid Model approach.

3 Methods

3.1 Study design

This study was conducted according to the hybrid model of concept development, whose purpose is to articulate the essential aspects of a concept’s definition and its methods of measurement (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). The study was pre-registered on Open Science Framework on April 22, 2024, prior to data collection (https://osf.io/fgj4w), and was reported using the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research (SRQR) checklist (O’Brien et al., 2014).

3.2 Data sources and analysis

There are three phases of the hybrid model: an initial, theoretical phase; a fieldwork phase; and a final, analytical phase (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000).

3.2.1 Theoretical phase

The theoretical phase of a hybrid concept analysis includes selecting a concept, searching the literature, and developing a preliminary understanding of the concepts’ meaning and measurement. A central task of the theoretical phase is to arrive at a working definition that will inform subsequent in-depth analysis and refinement of the concept (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). Investigators met over a period of several months to develop and refine the topic of this analysis. Subsequently, a systematic search of literature was conducted using CINAHL, Medline, and APA PsycINFO databases. Consistent with this methodology, the search was designed to illuminate the essential nature and measurement of the concept, rather than to describe or synthesize evidence for clinical decision-making (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). The search strategy used the terms (“cognitive work” AND nurs*). All articles that illuminated the essential nature or measurement of nursing cognitive work within an acute care setting were included that were written in English, peer-reviewed, and published in academic journals between 2001-2024. This time frame was chosen to reflect the pivotal shift in thinking about healthcare quality after publication of the seminal work Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century (Institute of Medicine, 2001). Article references were exported to Covidence (“Covidence Systematic Review Software,” 2025) for screening and management purposes.

Four investigators participated in the initial article screening to evaluate article relevancy based on title and abstract. Articles were excluded at this stage if they clearly demonstrated a focus on the wrong population or setting. After which, the full text was reviewed to confirm inclusion/exclusion eligibility. For both stages of selection, articles were reviewed by two investigators working independently. In the case of disagreement, articles were reviewed and discussed by four investigators to arrive at a consensus.

Article data was extracted using a standardized extraction tool within Covidence that included the study title, author, year, purpose, study design, provided definitions, attributes, antecedents, consequences, and measurement approaches (Appendix A). Extraction was completed by one investigator and reviewed for accuracy by a second investigator. No formal critical appraisal process was conducted, in adherence to the study methodology (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). Extracted data was exported to an analysis matrix where four investigators analyzed and discussed preliminary theoretical codes and categories. Extracted data was coded using inductive, descriptive coding and categories were developed based on code patterns, similarities, and differences, alongside iterative team discussion to identify definitions, attributes, antecedents, and consequences of cognitive work. A working definition was developed, along with the provisional identification of the concept’s antecedents and consequences (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000).

3.2.2 Fieldwork phase

The fieldwork phase supports in-depth analysis and refinement of the concept using empirical data. According to Schwartz-Barcott and Kim (2000), the fieldwork phase should be concurrent with ongoing literature analysis, and the literature should serve as an ongoing basis for comparison to fieldwork data. The steps of the fieldwork phase include setting the stage, negotiating entry, selecting cases, and collecting and analyzing data (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). Fieldwork was conducted on a critical care floor of a large, urban, academic, level-one trauma center in the Northeastern United States. This floor was chosen because a critical care environment offers the opportunity for rich, in-depth insight into acute nurses’ cognitive work. Entry was negotiated and facilitated by one of the investigators. Four investigators each completed two, four-hour observations between April to May 2025, for a total of eight observations. During observations, participants were purposefully recruited from working staff to include English-speaking registered nurses, with at least one year of acute care experience, and a bachelor’s degree or higher. Recommendations from the unit charge nurse were also considered. Nurses were excluded if they were newly transferred to the unit, on orientation, or a travel or temporary nurse.

Participant screening, consent, and demographic information were collected using a demographic questionnaire. An oral script guided the verbal informed consent process, the acceptance of which participants indicated by checking a box on the questionnaire. Demographic data included participants’ age, gender, level of education, and professional experience. No patient or identifiable information was collected, and nurse participants were identified using pseudonyms. During observations, unstructured handwritten field notes were collected using notebooks. Structured field notes were also collected using a qualitative data collection tool developed from the preliminary, theoretical phase findings (Appendix B). Investigators recorded observations about the nurse, interactions between the nurse and other staff, and the surrounding environment. Participants were asked brief probing questions about their actions, behaviors, and decisions, such as “How do you organize your shift?’ and ‘Why did you prioritize that particular care task [or patient]?”. Investigators did not enter patient rooms or interact with patients; patient rooms were covered in glass, allowing full visibility. All data was electronically transcribed for storage and analysis.

Fieldwork data collection and analysis occurred concurrently. Field notes were analyzed with deductive and inductive descriptive coding; deductive codes were generated from initial, theoretical phase results. All five investigators independently coded the first four observations and then convened to discuss and agree upon a preliminary set of fieldwork codes. The final four observations were then conducted and coded, after which, investigators again convened to discuss analysis. In case of disagreement, a majority consensus was reached through team discussion. Where new categories emerged through fieldwork, articles were re-read to illicit deeper understanding and identify additional substantiating data. All literature and fieldwork coding was then combined, organized, and clustered into emergent categories focused on the concept’s essential aspects and measurement (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000).

3.2.3 Final analytical phase

In the final analytical phase, investigators finalize working and write up their findings by integrating the theoretical and fieldwork phases. At this stage, investigators also more broadly consider the concept’s significance and relevancy to nursing (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). In this study, investigators used a consensus approach to consider all literature review and empirical evidence to draw final conclusions (Schwartz-Barcott and Kim, 2000). The writing process was lengthy, involving iterative refinements, deepening analysis, and multiple drafts to clarify and structure emergent categories as new insights emerged. Additional literature was consulted at this stage to clarify and distinguish the concept “cognitive work” from other prominent, related concepts.

Throughout the process, regular team meetings were conducted to calibrate data collection, prevent premature conclusions, and discuss patterns and findings. Investigators used memo-writing to prompt deeper analysis and reflexivity, including reflection on their own clinical experiences in critical care, long-term, sub-acute, hospice, and emergency nursing settings. Study results are substantiated by detailed evidence and data tables within the manuscript and accompanying appendices.

3.3 Ethical considerations

The study was approved by the University of Massachusetts-Chan Medical School Institutional Review Board (STUDY#00002228). Nurse participants were not directly compensated, but investigators provided snacks and coffee on the critical care unit during observations as a sign of appreciation for unit participation.

4 Results

4.1 Theoretical phase

4.1.1 Data sources

A total of 96 articles were initially obtained through database searching. After screening and review for eligibility, 23 articles were included (Braaten, 2015; Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Gilardi et al., 2014; Holden et al., 2014; Ihlebæk, 2020; Jennings et al., 2022; Krupp et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010; McLane et al., 2010; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019; Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Potter et al., 2005a; Redding and Robinson, 2009; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013; Sitterding et al., 2014; Wikström and Larsson, 2004; Wisner et al., 2021, 2019). See Appendix C for the full article search and screening process; Appendix D details each included article, its study design, discipline, offered definitions, descriptions of nursing cognitive work, measurement approaches, and codes related to conceptual attributes, antecedents, and consequences. The majority of included studies were conducted in the United States (18); other represented countries were France [2] (Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019), Italy [1] (Gilardi et al., 2014), Norway [1] (Ihlebæk, 2020), and Sweden [1] (Wikström and Larsson, 2004).

Seventeen articles were published in nursing and health journals, one in a health informatics journal (Lopez et al., 2010), and five in human factors/engineering journals (Drews and Doig, 2014; Holden et al., 2014; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019). All included articles explored or described the cognitive work of nurses within acute care settings. Study designs included conceptual/theoretical papers, systematic reviews, cognitive work analyses, and qualitative, descriptive, and quasi-experimental studies. Formal cognitive work and/or tasks analysis strategies were employed in six studies (Braaten, 2015; Krupp et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Sitterding et al., 2014), demonstrating a notable contribution to this limited body of scholarship. Where employed, these analytic strategies were used to illuminate the characteristics and constraints of nurse decision-making and cognitive behavior within complex sociotechnical systems, including nurses’ cognitive work while administering medications, triaging, providing emergency care, fall prevention, conducting mobility interventions, and activating rapid responses (Braaten, 2015; Krupp et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Sitterding et al., 2014).

Table 1 provides an overview of the theoretical phase codes, categories, and conceptual components, including preliminary antecedents, defining attributes, and consequences.Table 1 Theoretical phase codes, categories, and components of cognitive work.

Table 1 dummy alt textComponent	Category	Codes	
Antecedents	Existing knowledge	Competency, experience, experience and training, values and priorities	
Available information	Health information technology, environment, resources, technological artifacts, use of cognitive artifacts, culture, teamwork, health staff, information technology, protocols, policies, medical technologies, supplies and equipment, human resources, physical/built environment, physical objects, sufficient data, guidance, information, information availability, perceptual cues	
Cognitive capacity	Workspace constraints, systemic constraints, distractions, cognitive demands, cognitive burdens, time pressure, time constraints, technology and tools, workspace and resources, internal constraints, cognitive capacity, attention, attentional capacity, working memory capacity, memory	
Defining attributes	Complex, dynamic, nonlinear	Higher order, complex, complexity, chaotic, dynamic	
Comprised of mental processes	Knowledge work, cognitive processes, acquiring information, analyzing, anticipating, assessing patients, automated processing, clinical judgement, clinical reasoning, cognitive shift, communicating, coordinating, creating a mental image/developing a baseline schema, critical thinking, cue integration/managing multiple cues, decision making, deliberating, developing mutual understanding, drawing comparisons, forming a mental image, getting to know the patient over time, goal setting, heuristics, identification of missing information, information management, information processing, interpreting, intuition, justify decisions, logic, macro-cognition, managing interruptions, memory-keeping, mitigating risk, monitoring, monitoring over time, multitasking/juggling multiple tasks, organizing information, organizing cues, oversight of doctors, perceiving, planning, prioritization, proactive thinking, problem-solving, process organizers, processing and synthesizing information, promoting continuity of care, questioning, reflection/reflexivity, remembering, retrieval of information, reviewing and exchanging information, scanning, scheduling, sense-making, setting goals, shared understanding, situational awareness, social thinking, speculating, stacking, supplementing data, surveillance, synthesizing, task management, thinking, workaround/problem-solving, written and mental chunking schemas	
Consequences	Knowledge and expertise	Nursing knowledge, formal knowledge, informal knowledge, knowing, knowing the patient, expertise, evolving understanding	
Nurse workload and well-being	Nurse well-being, workload, cognitive load, mental workload	
Goal achievement	Accurately triage, achieve goals of nursing care, comprehend and attend to patient needs, document, continue or modify patient care plan, implementing treatment plan activities, prevent delays in care, clinical immediacy, ability to adhere to clinical protocols, collective problem-solving, patient safety, identify physiologic changes, interrupt adverse outcomes, failure to rescue prevent complications, near-miss events, patient deterioration, prevent medication errors, prevent functional decline, prevent falls, prevent healthcare associated infections, reduce omissions in care, escalate concerns, prevent patient harm	

4.1.2 Antecedents

Antecedents are the conditions or factors that precede the occurrence of nursing cognitive work. During theoretical analysis, antecedents were understood to be the factors that shape how nurses engage in cognitive work and that influence the quality, depth, and efficiency of their cognitive processes. Literature suggested that nurses’ cognitive work is shaped by both individual nursing characteristics and the surrounding work environment, which determine three basic antecedents: nurses’ existing knowledge, available information, and cognitive capacity.

Existing knowledge. Nurses’ cognitive work relies on their existing knowledge, beliefs, competencies, and experience levels. Nurses with greater experience and competency demonstrate stronger clinical reasoning, situational awareness, and cognitive strategies than less experienced nurses (Braaten, 2015; Gazarian, 2013; Krupp et al., 2022; Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012; Sitterding et al., 2014). Attitudes, perspectives, and values also impact nurses’ cognitive work, shaping how nurses interpret information and adhere to established rules and procedures (Mumma et al., 2024).

Available information. In addition to existing knowledge and understanding, cognitive work emerges from new information. The availability, access, and quality of information impact a nurse’s ability to gather perceptual cues, construct mental images or schemas, and collect pertinent patient data (Gazarian, 2013; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013). Informational availability is shaped by health information technologies and external cognitive artifacts, such as the electronic health record, monitors, signage, documentation sheets, or visual displays that externally record, maintain, and distribute information (Gilardi et al., 2014; Krupp et al., 2022; McLane et al., 2010; Wisner et al., 2021, 2019).

Also relevant are the cultural and social characteristics of a department. Information is shared and contextualized across team members (Gilardi et al., 2014). Scholars have argued for the socialness of thinking, proposing that cognition does not exist in isolation from a community or social system and is distributed across a team (Gilardi et al., 2014; Krupp et al., 2022; Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012).

Cognitive capacity. Cognitive work is finite and exhaustible. Nurses’ capacity for mental labor is constrained by both internal and external factors. Internal factors include a nurses’ cognitive capabilities, such as their attention, level of concentration, mental effort, focus, memory, verbal abilities, and task-switching abilities (Gazarian, 2013; Holden et al., 2014; Jennings et al., 2022; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019; Mumma et al., 2024; Potter et al., 2005a; Sitterding et al., 2014; Wisner et al., 2021).

External factors include interruptions, competing priorities, distractions, time pressure, turbulence, unpredictability, and noise level (Gazarian, 2013; Holden et al., 2014; Ihlebæk, 2020; Jennings et al., 2022; Morineau et al., 2021; Ng and Curley, 2012; Wisner et al., 2021). These external factors are determined by the context of a nurses’ clinical work environment, comprised of the technologies and supplies, physical attributes, staffing levels and human resources, and policies of their department (Wisner et al., 2021, 2019). Poorly designed environments, unintuitive technology or unit layouts, alarm fatigue, information overload, and inadequate policies or processes hamper cognitive work by increasing nurses’ mental demands (Holden et al., 2014; Lopez et al., 2010; Wisner et al., 2019).

4.1.3 Preliminary attributes

Complex, dynamic, and nonlinear. Nursing cognitive work is highly complex, dynamic, and nonlinear (Drews and Doig, 2014; Jennings et al., 2022; Mumma et al., 2024; Potter et al., 2005a; Sitterding et al., 2014). Cognitive work is not performed sequentially, but continuously evolves and responds to its contextual surroundings (Gazarian, 2013; Ihlebæk, 2020; Wisner et al., 2021, 2019). Scholars describe nurses’ mental processes as overlapping, iterative, fragmented, and involving an interplay between different forms of knowledge (Ihlebæk, 2020; Jennings et al., 2022). Unlike physical work, cognitive work lacks a clear beginning or end, and nurses often perform several tasks in parallel (Jennings et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010).

Comprised of mental processes. Nursing cognitive work encompasses many mental processes. During theoretical analysis, over 70 unique codes were identified that reflected a mental task or process; at this stage in the analysis, categorizations of these mental processes were not established.

Collectively, this literature suggests that nurses perform ongoing processes of gathering and synthesizing data from multiple sources to build a rich clinical picture of their patient(s) (Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Ihlebæk, 2020; Krupp et al., 2022). Nurses sustain a high level of attentiveness to their surroundings, mentally tracking patients over time to detect cues that often evolve subtly and incrementally without overt objective signals (Braaten, 2015; Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Pfrimmer et al., 2017). Nurses use the process of interpretation, or sensemaking, to systematically find a coherent understanding of this dynamic information (Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Wikström and Larsson, 2004). Research demonstrates that nurses integrate multiple cues to establish a mental image or schema of each patient that captures their understanding of the patient’s overall condition and clinical stability (Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Gilardi et al., 2014; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013; Wisner et al., 2021). New data is contrasted to these baseline schemas to recognize patterns and trends over time (Gazarian, 2013; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013). Nurses also draw from patient profiles and schemata, which represent their experiential understanding of how typical patient presentations should appear (Gazarian, 2013; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013). Personal cognitive artifacts, such as note sheets, checklists, or visual aids, are another strategy that nurses use to collect, organize, and retain information (McLane et al., 2010; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019).

Nursing cognitive work encompasses clinical reasoning and decision-making processes. Decision-making may rely on a process of deliberate analysis and the purposeful consideration of information, but also draws from speculation, informal knowledge, intuition, subjectivity, and cognitive heuristics (Braaten, 2015; Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Gilardi et al., 2014; Ihlebæk, 2020; Mumma et al., 2024; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Potter et al., 2005a; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013; Sitterding et al., 2014; Wisner et al., 2021). Some decisions are made automatically without conscious control, while others are based on rules or protocols, and the most cognitively taxing decisions demand consideration of goals within their specific contexts (Braaten, 2015). When making high-risk or resource-intensive decisions, such as calling a rapid response activation, nurses may seek or articulate a rationale to justify their choice (Braaten, 2015). Nursing interpretation, reasoning, and decision-making are refined and strengthened through learning and reflexivity (McLane et al., 2010; Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012).

Nursing cognitive work is also characterized by multi-tasking, task switching, cognitive shifting, and adapting to unpredictability (Jennings et al., 2022; Potter et al., 2005a; Redding and Robinson, 2009; Sitterding et al., 2014). Nurses are concerned with anticipating and mitigating future risk, proactively planning, and preparing within a landscape of uncertainty (Drews and Doig, 2014; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019; Mumma et al., 2024; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Sitterding et al., 2014). Creativity and ingenuity are employed to problem-solve and overcome barriers to nursing workflows or care (Gilardi et al., 2014; Jennings et al., 2022; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019; Wikström and Larsson, 2004). Therefore, cognitive work extends beyond clinical reasoning, clinical judgment, and decision-making to include the ongoing, situated, and adaptive processes of managing the evolving demands of a clinical environment.

4.1.4 Consequences

Three preliminary categories of consequences were identified. These consequences illustrate the widespread impact of nurses’ cognitive work on both patients and nurses.

Knowledge and expertise. Just as nurses’ cognitive work relies on their experience and current understanding, the processes of thinking, learning, and reflection contribute to growing expertise. Over time, the performance of cognitive work results in a greater depth of knowledge, improved mental models, more effective cognitive strategies and heuristics, and improved reasoning and decision-making process (Gazarian, 2013; Jennings et al., 2022; Mumma et al., 2024; Ng and Curley, 2012; Sitterding et al., 2014).

Nurse workload and well-being. As one component of nursing work, cognitive work impacts nurses’ overall workload level and their well-being (Jennings et al., 2022; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Ng and Curley, 2012; Potter et al., 2005a). High levels of cognitive demands can increase stress, irritation, fatigue, burnout, impair sleep, delay recovery, and reduce well-being (Jennings et al., 2022; Ng and Curley, 2012). Nurses’ cognitive work also has implications for staff safety or harm (Krupp et al., 2022).

Action and goal achievement. Cognitive work is the precursor to physical action in the world. These actions are taken in pursuit of varied goals (Ihlebæk, 2020; McLane et al., 2010; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019). Several authors noted that nurses’ cognitive work determines their ability to continue, modify, or implement a nursing care plan (McLane et al., 2010; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019). Cognitive work is also relevant to prevent delays in nursing care, appropriately respond and address patient needs, adhere to policies or procedures, manage tasks, and document care (Gilardi et al., 2014; Ihlebæk, 2020; Morineau et al., 2021; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019; Ng and Curley, 2012; Potter et al., 2005a).

Nurses’ cognitive work is also highly relevant to patient safety. The ability to identify, interrupt, or mitigate adverse outcomes and harm was frequently noted, including errors, complications, patient deterioration, near-miss events, missed care, and nurse-sensitive outcomes such as falls and infection (Braaten, 2015; Drews and Doig, 2014; Gazarian, 2013; Gilardi et al., 2014; Holden et al., 2014; Krupp et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Mumma et al., 2024; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Potter et al., 2005a; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013; Sitterding et al., 2014). On the other hand, increased cognitive demands or constraints can lead to goal discrepancy, or the failure to achieve positive outcomes (Jennings et al., 2022).

4.1.5 Measurement of the concept

Nursing cognitive work may be assessed using both qualitative and quantitative approaches. Among 23 included articles, 15 collected data using interviews, focus groups, field notes, observations, think-aloud methods, and artifact analysis. Quantitatively, cognitive work may be measured using the NASA Task Load Index (Drews and Doig, 2014; Lopez et al., 2010; Wisner et al., 2019) or instruments of response time, accuracy, or error rates (Drews and Doig, 2014; Holden et al., 2014; Morineau et al., 2021). Several studies employed traditional or heuristic cognitive work analysis methodologies that identify nurses’ work domains, tasks, processes, environmental constraints, and available information (Braaten, 2015; Krupp et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2010; Morineau et al., 2021; Morineau and Flach, 2019; Mount-Campbell et al., 2019). Cognitive task analysis and critical decision methods were also used to illuminate the cognitive processing underlying task performance and decision-making (Gazarian, 2013; Mumma et al., 2024).

4.1.6 Working definition

Based on the theoretical phase alone, nursing cognitive work was defined as the complex, dynamic, and context-sensitive mental processes nurses perform to deliver safe and effective care. Nurse cognitive work encompasses a range of cognitive activities such as clinical decision-making, planning, sensemaking, monitoring, judgment, reasoning, and critical thinking. This work is constrained by both external mental workload (e.g., interruptions, distractions, time pressure) and internal mental workload (e.g., concentration, risk perception) and is deeply embedded in situated and social cognition.

This working definition (illustrated in Appendix E) provided a foundation for the next stage of data collection and in-depth analysis. Based on preliminary findings, investigators understood that cognitive work is conceptualized as work situated within a specific social and real-world clinical context and is shaped by personal, technological, and organizational factors. Therefore, investigators intentionally observed the characteristics, and nurses’ interactions with, the clinical environment, including technology, physical objects and resources, noise levels, team members, unit characteristics, and the impact of interruptions and time pressure (see Appendix B for structured data collection tool).

4.2 Fieldwork phase

Eight nurses participated in the fieldwork phase. Six participants identified as female (75%) and two as male (25%). Five (62.5%) had a bachelor’s degree and three (37.5%) had a master’s degree. The sample was highly experienced, with 75% of participants reporting greater than 10 years of nursing experience in an acute care setting. See Table 2 for participant demographics.Table 2 Demographic characteristics.

Table 2 dummy alt text	n	%	
Gender			
 Woman	6	75.0	
 Man	2	25.0	
Non-binary/Prefer not to say/Other	0	0	
Age			
 29 and younger	0	0	
 30-34	2	25.0	
 35-39	2	25.0	
 40-44	1	12.5	
 45-49	1	12.5	
 50-54	1	12.5	
 55-59	1	12.5	
 60 and older	0	0	
Highest level of education			
 Bachelors	5	62.5	
 Masters	3	37.5	
 DNP, PhD, or other Doctoral degree	0	0	
Years of RN experience			
 5 years or less	0	0	
 6-10 years	2	25.0	
 More than 10 years	6	75.0	
Years of acute care experience			
 1	0	0	
 2	0	0	
 3	1	12.5	
 4	1	12.5	
 5	0	0	
 6-10	0	0	
 More than 10	6	75.0	

The fieldwork phase supported the theoretical phase antecedents, attributes, and consequences, but offered a richer, more comprehensive understanding of acute nurses’ cognitive work. The fieldwork phase added three contributions: (1) the refinement and categorization of nurses’ mental processes, (2) the identification of the multidimensional nature of nurses’ cognitive work, and (3) a broadening understanding of its consequences on action and goal achievement. See Table 3 for a summary of analytic progression.Table 3 Integration of analytical phases.

Table 3 dummy alt textConceptual Component	Theoretical Phase	Fieldwork Phase	Substantiating Fieldwork Data	
Antecedents	Existing knowledge	Affirmed	RN3 cared for this same patient yesterday…he was able to come into his shift this morning, listen to what happened overnight, and immediately begin care, already having a sense of what he needed to do, and what they might try.- Field Note 3	
Available information	Affirmed	RN7 takes notes from night shift and uses them to plan her work…she starts by coming in a bit early, reviewing patient notes (to “get a picture of who they are”), looks at orders and flow sheets, and checks for all/any lines or tubes. Then she goes for report to fill in gaps from her review. – Field Note 6	
Cognitive capacity	Affirmed	Then, “Oh! I gotta go scan that thing before I get yelled at.” RN3 hops up, explaining, “I forget to scan a flush when I’m giving my med[ication]s and it takes me a solid two hours to get back to it.” (RN3) – Field Note 3	
Defining attributes	Complex, dynamic, nonlinear	Affirmed	“Alright, I’m all caught up.” “Thank god.” (RN6). At this time, she notices a new note from the plastic surgeon and reads it. She adds a written note to her nurse brain. This is something she needs to pass on to the next nurse in report. Patient’s daughter exits the room to speak with RN6.... Overhead announcement: “Rapid Response Pediatric Clinic.” – Field Note 5	
Comprised of mental processes	Identified seven major categories	RN6 enters the patient room. She tells me she will be administering medication, taking blood glucose reading, and performing a neurological exam.- Field Note 5	
–	Multi-dimensional	Contents of the nurses’ note: Basic information about the patient’s reason for admission, information about the patient by system, location of intravenous access, foley, personal/social aspects about the patient (their career, “the spouse is nice”), checklist of to-dos (chest tube, 9am medications, tube feed, vital signs). – Field Note 5	
Consequences	Knowledge and expertise	Affirmed	RN8 “I used to set an alarm to remind me to do neuro[logical] checks, but now I don’t need it.” She explains to me that she can now remember to complete the neurological checks on time without needing to set an alarm on her phone. – Field Note 7	
Workload and well-being	Affirmed	The nurse calls out to RN3 that she needs a boost and will be restraining her patient again. He hops up to help, again expressing his regret that her assignment is so challenging… [She] “has the assignment from hell today” (RN3). – Field Note 3	
Action and goal achievement	Identified three major categories	RN6 told me she advocated for the patient to receive a portable computed tomography [CT] scan because the patient was desatting [declining oxygen saturation] … At the beginning of the shift, she reviewed the patient’s notes and saw that the patient was diagnosed with a pneumothorax. At that time, she wondered why the patient did not have a chest tube placed. During morning rounds, the residents discussed the plan to place a chest tube that day. – Field Note 5	

4.2.1 Defining attributes

Comprised of mental processes. During the fieldwork phase, all codes related to mental processes were clustered into 26 subcategories and seven major categories for the purpose of summarizing the most salient findings (see Table 4). More detailed descriptions of each subcategory may be found in Appendix F. These categories may not comprehensively capture all of nurses’ cognitive work, but they illuminate its breadth and complexity. Nurses’ cognitive work is comprised of absorbing information, interpreting information, reasoning and forming judgments, managing attention and multiple demands, problem-solving, prospective thinking, and accumulating knowledge over time.Table 4 Fieldwork phase codes, subcategories, major categories, and components of cognitive work.

Table 4 dummy alt textComponent	Major categories	Subcategories	Fieldwork Codes	
Attributes	
Comprised of mental processes	Absorbing information	• Global attentiveness
• Longitudinal attentiveness
• Assessing
• Re-assessment
• Seeking	Noticing, watching, physical assessment, collecting data, gathering data, monitoring over time, re-evaluation, reassessment, digging deeper, searching for information	
Interpreting information	• Cue weighting
• Validating
• Synthesizing
• Interpreting
• Schema development and comparison	Organizing cues, cue integration, managing multiple cues, processing information from multiple data sources, validating, verifying, clarifying, double-checking, questioning, overseeing, synthesizing, organizing information, integrating, perceiving, interpreting, information processing, sense-making	
Reasoning and forming judgments	• Speculating
• Intuiting
• Reasoning
• Deciding
• Justifying	Managing uncertainty, ambiguity, inferring, using expertise, considering, choosing, selecting a course of action, explaining	
Managing attention and multiple demands	• Prioritizing
• Multi-tasking
• Attention management
• Adapting	Balancing multiple priorities, competing priorities, managing tradeoffs, divided attention, clustering tasks, focus, concentration, adapting, reacting, accommodating	
Problem-solving	• Problem-solving	Trouble-shooting, improvising, making do	
Prospective thinking	• Risk calculation
• Anticipating
• Goal setting	Considering consequences, considering effects/downsides, thinking ahead, anticipating needs, planning ahead, establishing goals of care	
Accumulating knowledge	• Recalling
• Reflecting
• Learning	Remembering, retaining knowledge, recalling, holding knowledge of patient, reflecting, learning, developing/building expertise	
Multi-dimensional work	Clinical thinking	• Clinical knowledge
• Patient-specific knowledge	Providing patient care, attending to clinical care, teaching, knowing the patient, understanding the patient, knowing the family, evolving patient understanding,	
Care orchestration	• Management and ordering of care activities
• Management of the physical care environment
• Institutional knowledge	Managing/ monitoring orders, task management, clustering/configuring care, rescheduling, organizing workflow, planning supplies, keeping track of supplies, managing physical environment, lack of supplies, alarm management, promoting cleanliness, knowledge of norms, knowledge of institution, knowledge of policies, protocol interpretation	
Relational thinking	• Intra- and interprofessional work
• Socio-emotional work	Providing emotional support, managing interpersonal dynamics, connecting, moral judgement	
Consequence	
Action and goal achievement	Safe, high-quality care	• Patient safety
• Ethical care
• Compassionate care
• Privacy and dignity	Patient safety, advocating, teaching, managing visitors, helping family, thinking about comfort and well-being, promoting privacy, promoting dignity, managing ethical challenges	
Efficiency	• Patient throughput
• Care progression
• Avoid resource waste
• Workflow efficiency	Advancing care, progression of care, expediting care, concerned with waste, concerned with efficiency	
Positive working environment	• Team members’ well-being
• Collaboration and support	Promoting teamwork, collaboration, helping peers	

Absorbing information. The absorption of information involves the intake and integration of disparate data from multiple sources. Nurses maintain global and longitudinal attentiveness to their surroundings and engage in more purposeful inquiry, including assessments, reassessments, and seeking out of additional information when data is incomplete. Fieldwork illustrated a breadth of data sources, which include physical patient assessments, subjective reports, medical technologies and devices, diagnostic tests and lab results, documented notes, and oral communication.RN7 is in Room 2, taking temperature and performing mouth care. Returns to… EPIC [electronic health record] to review flowsheets, vitals, and look at incoming labs, nodding at results. – Field Note 6

Interpreting information. As nurses perceive multiple cues from several data sources, they evaluate each for its relative importance and validity. During observations, nurses received many inaccurate clinical results and irrelevant alarms, which they sought to verify or dismiss.She is running manual blood pressures to verify the patient's true pressure and advises the student to adjust the patient’s wrist for a more accurate reading. – Field Note 2

Nurses then synthesize, interpret, and contextualize this information to make sense of its meaning and significance. Interpretation draws from nurses’ clinical knowledge, understanding of each patient, prior observations, and the recognition of trends over time.The patient seemed a little more stimulated, and the participant stated he was assessing whether this change was because of the morning care or whether the patient needed more Precedex. He explained that in neurology, there was a delicate balance to try to understand a patient’s mental status. – Field Note 2

Reasoning and forming judgments. Nurses analyze, or reason, using critical thinking, intuition, and speculation to arrive at decisions. In observations, many decisions were made rapidly, while others required more deliberate, lengthy processes of weighing relative advantages and disadvantages. When feeling uncertain, nurses verbalized their reasoning, consulted with peers, gathered more information, or tested their assumptions.He thinks out loud, “I wonder if it’s the Dilaudid that did this?” Chatting with the other nurse beside him, he scrolls back to find that the Dilaudid was given around midnight last night. It was a small dose, “I mean more from the synergistic effect from all three of them. It’s the only thing that’s new, ‘cause I didn’t give that to him yesterday.” (RN3) -Field Note 3

Managing attention and multiple demands. Throughout the course of a shift, nurses are bombarded with multiple competing priorities and demands. Nurses must carefully prioritize these demands, multi-task, adapt to shifting conditions, and manage their own focus and attention.When I’m “in room 1, I’m also thinking about room 2” to think about “ways to be more efficient, taking multiple steps at one time.” RN7 notes, “You don’t realize how much you are doing at one time.” - Field Note 6

Problem-solving. Problem-solving is another feature of nurses’ cognitive work. Such problem-solving, or trouble-shooting, is needed to identify creative workarounds or temporary solutions to problems that nurses encounter throughout each day.RN2 will attempt step-by-step interventions… She does not do everything at once, so she will know which one helped. She changed the phenylephrine for the patient’s blood pressure. She also checked the temperature to see if that could be the issue.- Field Note 4

Prospective thinking. Prospective thinking describes the cognitive work of considering the future, including anticipation, goal setting, and calculations of future risk. Fieldwork participants emphasized that the skill of anticipation is strongly influenced by a nurse’s experience, which determines their ability to accurately predict patient progression, deterioration, and care trajectories.“Because I have more experience, I can better expect what they’ll want to do on rounds, like where things are heading” (RN3)- Field Note 3

Accumulating knowledge. Last, nursing cognitive work encompasses the work of accumulating knowledge over time, including learning, recollection, and reflection. Nurses develop knowledge relevant to clinical practice, but they also build expertise across all dimensions of their work. Learning occurs through formal training and education, mentorship, and first-hand experience.RN8 has a printout of the following images: Intercranial Hemorrhage, Ischemic and Hemorrhagic Stroke, Head Injury…She printed them for the orientee but sometimes she will print images for herself because she finds it helpful to visualize. – Field Note 7

Nurses also retain knowledge. During observations, interdisciplinary team members often looked to the nurses to provide a historical understanding of past events and decisions.They discuss intravenous fluids, and the resident mentions that the patient was receiving hypertonic saline and is now hypernatremic. There seems to be some uncertainty among the providers as to why the patient was ordered that fluid. RN3 describes why the decision was made yesterday by previous providers, offering their rationale. – Field Note 3

Reflecting is the act of reflexively considering oneself. Nurses reflect on their own thinking, cognitive strategies, attention, and decisions. Such reflection helps nurses learn, develop and refine strategies or habits, and better understand themselves.When describing himself, RN3 states “I look at the 10,000 foot view because that’s how my brain trained itself over the past 2 years.”– Field Note 3

Multidimensional. Fieldwork observations offered a third defining attribute, which clarifies that mental demands arise from all aspects of the multidimensional nursing role. The delivery of nursing care requires deep clinical and patient-specific knowledge, but also the practical know-how of navigating institutional processes and policies, assembling required materials, coordinating work and services, collaborating, and sustaining effective healthcare teams. Three dimensions of acute nursing cognitive work were identified.

Clinical thinking. Clinical thinking encompasses thinking and reasoning related to patients’ clinical needs. This work requires a deep understanding of pathophysiology, pharmacology, symptoms and disease trajectories, clinical data and diagnostics, and nursing interventions.He reassesses the patient’s cognitive status by asking some orientation questions, asking the patient to hold up their thumb, and using a light to look at the patient’s pupils. – Field Note 3

Clinical thinking also includes patient-specific knowledge. Nurses accumulate an understanding of each patient’s unique needs, preferences, personalities, and patterns of response. This knowledge is passed between nurses to build a longitudinal understanding of each patient and their clinical trajectory.She discusses with her student titrating down one of their drip rates, “I just want to do a small change first, ‘cause I’m not familiar with her. So why don’t we go down to 0.75 and see how much she drops?”– Field Note 1

Care orchestration. Observations emphasized the enormous amount of cognitive effort required to orchestrate patient care. This work encompasses thinking and knowledge related to managing the physical environment, supplies, equipment, and technologies. Nurses must know which supplies are needed, where they are located, and how they function. The quantity of required supplies is vast, ranging from medications, intravenous fluids and tubing; to personal care supplies like pillows, soap, gowns, or towels; to dressings and wound care supplies; and to diagnostic supplies like vials, needles, and labels.The nurse is removing an intravenous pump channel… [she] examines how much volume is left in each of the intravenous bags and discuss how much time is left before they run out. As they turned to leave the room, RN1 counts on her fingers, listing the supplies they need to collect, “So we need xeroform…”-Field Note 1

Care orchestration also encompasses the organization, coordination, and management of tasks and activities. Nurses develop specific knowledge of how to conduct and deliver care, arrange services, navigate care processes, advance care trajectories, and resolve delays. They also must stay apprised of their own workflows, ordered tasks, outstanding work, and task deadlines.Among the documents posted around her charting station… is a concise list of nursing tasks that need to be performed every shift or as ordered by provider…(e.g., change Propofol bags every 12 hours, restraints need to be ordered daily, dysphagia screening for everyone prior to oral intake). –Field Note 7

Last, care orchestration relies on an understanding of institution-specific policies and procedures. In observations, nurses demonstrated knowledge of specific rules related to orders, processes, and interventions like patient restraints.RN6 stated that during rounds this morning she asked the patient’s provider to add an order for a right-sided mitten… The RN asked for this order specifically because she knows that the restraint policy requires very specific orders. - Field Note 5

Relational thinking. Finally, nurses exerted substantial attention to interpersonal relationships. Nurses are mindful of patients’ social, emotional, and spiritual needs, including considerations of comfort, privacy, and dignity.The interpreter is playing music and singing for patient… “I know it is not the proper use of an interpreter. I asked her if she minded staying on with her” (RN7). – Field Note 6

Nurses also develop knowledge of social norms, unit culture, and managing team dynamics, demonstrating an attentiveness to the well-being of their peers, communication, and professional collaboration.Another nurse swings by, “You guys need anything?” “No, we’re good.”- Field Note 1

4.2.2 Consequences

Action and goal achievement. Just as nurses’ cognitive work encompasses multiple dimensions of practice, nurses juggle several disparate goals, not only promoting patient safety and care quality, but also demonstrating a conscientiousness for resource utilization, work efficiency, and their peers.

Safe, high-quality care. Observations confirmed that nursing cognitive work has important implications for patient safety and care efficacy. Nurses’ ability to accurately assess and interpret clinical information, form clinical judgements, and correctly anticipate patient trajectories determines their ability to provide appropriate interventions and prevent clinical deterioration.The participant is concerned about the patient’s bradycardia; is it medication-related, a side effect of the chemical, or the low temperature? Low heart rate is a concern; she also needs to ensure he is well oxygenated.- Field Note 4

Nurses’ cognitive work also influences the wider experience and socioemotional well-being of patients, family members, and visitors. By attending to the social, emotional, and comfort needs of those around them, nurses foster a sense of compassion and care.“Oh, this makes you cough – you don’t like that do you. It’s alright.” In calming, soothing kind voice to patient.” - Field Note 6

Efficiency. Nursing cognitive work determines the timeliness and efficiency of patient care. During observations, participants’ thinking played a key role in shaping patients’ care progression and throughput. Nurses’ attentiveness to resource conservation and workflow efficiency shapes the degree of waste and delay in care. This consequence was exemplified by a nurse’s careful effort to avoid the excessive use of supplies, a nurse’s decision to personally perform an electrocardiogram to expedite results, and a nurse who even jogged ahead of a stretcher to mitigate any potential delays during patient transport.RN8 speaking with a nurse colleague, “I’m going down to CT [computed tomography] in about five minutes, can you open up the doors?” The other nurse answers, “Yeah, I can drive (the bed).”- Field Note 7

Positive working environment. Last, nurses’ cognitive work shapes their team members’ well-being, collaboration and teamwork, and the broader culture of their working environment. During fieldwork, participants exerted significant effort to support their nursing peers. As such, staff widely praised the positive working environment of the unit.When people walk by, I try to see if they need anything. We have a good team here, which is nice.- Field Note 8

4.3 Final, analytical phase

4.3.1 Final model of nurse cognitive work within an acute care setting

A final model was developed to integrate theoretical and fieldwork findings (Figure 1). In this figure, the black and white illustrations reflect theoretical contributions while the colored illustrations reflect fieldwork findings.Fig. 1 Final analytical model of cognitive work of acute care nurses.

Fig 1 dummy alt text

In addition to summarizing the concept’s antecedents, attributes, and consequences, the model emphasizes that cognitive work is individualized and context dependent. Rather than acting as strict antecedents, a nurse’s individual characteristics and the surrounding work environment are dynamically interrelated- both shaping and shaped by- nurses’ cognitive work. Therefore, “individual characteristics” and “work environment” are depicted in a surrounding circle that lacks a clear boundary.

4.3.2 Final conceptual definition

Nursing cognitive work is comprised of the complex, dynamic, and nonlinear mental processes of absorbing and interpreting information, reasoning and forming judgements, managing attention and multiple demands, problem-solving, engaging in prospective thinking, and accumulating knowledge over time. This work is multidimensional, performed across nurses’ clinical care, care orchestration, and relational work. Cognitive work is highly individualized and context dependent, with consequences for the development of nursing knowledge and expertise, nurses’ mental strain, emotional exhaustion, and their ability to provide safe, high-quality, efficient care in a positive working environment.

4.3.3 Related concepts

Prominent related constructs include decision-making, critical thinking, clinical reasoning, clinical judgement, surveillance, situational awareness, and vigilance. Each of these constructs describes mental processes performed by nurses, but do not comprehensively capture all the cognitive work that nurses perform. Cognitive work, instead, is overarching concept that encompasses these mental processes alongside the labor of prioritization, muti-tasking, managing attention, adapting and task switching, problem-solving, and the cumulative work of planning, goal-setting, and learning over time.

Moreover, these related terms do less to emphasize the multidimensionality, complexity, dynamicity, and nonlinearity of nurses’ cognitive work. The concept “cognitive work” is a broad concept intended to capture the mental effort required across several dimensions of nursing work, extending beyond clinical or bedside care. Furthermore, it more explicitly contends with the realities and demands of working in a messy, complex, and demanding work environment.

5 Discussion

As described above, the nursing profession has long struggled to articulate the nature and value of its work. Recently, research and academia have emphasized critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and clinical judgment as the foundations for nursing theory, education, and practice (Doyon and Raymond, 2025; Jessee, 2021; Zuriguel Pérez et al., 2015). Despite their significance, these constructs suffer from ongoing conceptual confusion that has impeded efforts to more rigorously investigate and measure nursing work (Zuriguel Pérez et al., 2015; Nibbelink and Brewer, 2018; Griffits et al., 2023). This hybrid model of concept development sought to explore a different lens through which to frame nurses’ mental work. Our findings demonstrate that “cognitive work” is a multi-disciplinary concept that is growing in recognition and relevance to nursing. We conclude that this concept is well-suited to describe contemporary nursing practice because of its breadth, its recognition of the complex work environment, and its suitability to potentially measure, analyze, and improve nursing work.

Our findings indicate that nursing cognitive work is a broad concept that captures a distinct aspect of nursing labor (Jackson et al., 2021). As a form of work, “cognitive work” does not reflect a singular, sequential process, but rather, encompasses numerous, simultaneous mental processes that nurses perform in the pursuit of multiple, competing goals (Krupp et al., 2022; Morineau et al., 2021; Mumma et al., 2024; Wisner et al., 2021). This concept incorporates all of the complex, dynamic, and nonlinear mental labor required to absorb and synthesize information, reason and make decisions, manage attention and multiple demands, problem-solve obstacles or barriers to care, prospectively anticipate and set goals, longitudinally track and recall patient knowledge over time, and learn. As such, the concept of cognitive work offers a useful umbrella concept to collectively describe critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and clinical judgment, as well as unite diverse scholarship about nursing surveillance, vigilance, situational awareness, prioritization, multi-tasking, and clinical expertise (Meyer and Lavin, 2005; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Rhudy and Androwich, 2013; Sitterding et al., 2014).

Importantly, nursing cognitive work is multidimensional, extending beyond the boundaries of clinical, bedside practice. Nurses dedicate significant cognitive effort to orchestrate patient care and services, manage the physical environment and resources, and develop knowledge of institution-specific policies and processes. They are also closely involved in thinking about social, emotional, and ethical situations that arise among patients, visitors, and other healthcare providers. These findings complement emerging scholarship about nurses’ diverse contributions to the functioning of healthcare organizations, including the organization and advancement of patients’ care trajectories, management of patient flow, and stewardship and allocation of physical resources (Allen, 2015a, 2015b; Benjamin, 2024; Heydari et al., 2015; Jackson et al., 2021). Nurses are not only care providers, but are the organizers and facilitators that enable the delivery of care across a hospital (Allen, 2015b). This new, broad definition of nurses’ mental labor may contribute towards a more comprehensive understanding of nurses’ role and better alignment between academic descriptions of nursing work and the realities of contemporary practice (Allen, 2015a, 2015b; Jackson et al., 2021).

As context-dependent work, nurses’ cognitive work is shaped and limited by the people, culture, technological and resources, and physical attributes of their unit. This perspective, influenced by systems and human factors engineering, emphasizes the fundamental influence of nurses’ work system on their work processes and outcomes (Holden and Carayon, 2021). Collectively, this research emphasizes the critical need to reduce interruptions, turbulence, and incompatibilities between organizational processes, technologies, and nursing workflows (Jennings et al., 2022). At the same time, there is recognition that cognitive work is individualized, with capabilities and expertise varying across nursing staff. Nursing education and practice may benefit from a growing awareness of the significance of individuals’ attention, focus, and memory (Kissler et al., 2024; Varvani Farahani et al., 2024).

Moreover, the concept’s antecedents and consequences underscore that cognitive work is inherently capacity-constrained and impacts nursing workload. These findings complement Jackson et al.’s (2021) argument that “cognitive work” is a useful concept to reveal the nature of nurses’ mental work alongside its associated burdens. The term “work” typically refers to activities, functions, or tasks that require effort or exertion (Alghamdi, 2016; Morris et al., 2007). Work may be quantified by measures of workload, which assess the amount of work performed over time or the perceived effort required (Hoonakker et al., 2011). Nursing workload has been extensively studied in academic literature and its significance was further emphasized by the COVID-19 pandemic (Cho et al., 2023; Griffiths et al., 2020). However, even as healthcare work complexity and demands have risen, current measures of nursing workload often fail to account for cognitive demands (Benjamin et al., 2025). The contributions and limitations of nurses’ cognitive work are consequential to patient safety and care quality, workflow efficiency, and the competency and wellbeing of the nursing workforce. Therefore, greater consideration of nurses’ cognitive workload may be a decisive factor in enhancing the quality and safety of nursing care (Galatzan et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026).

Finally, the concept of cognitive work is potentially well-suited to analyze, measure, and improve nursing work. Rigorous study of nurses’ cognitive work has the potential to mitigate diverse organizational and environmental impediments to nursing care, rather than scrutinizing the training or decisions of an individual nurse (Braaten, 2015). There is great opportunity for nurse researchers to apply formal cognitive analysis methodologies, such as cognitive work and task analyses. Cross-disciplinary concepts such as cognitive load, workload, cognitive stacking, and cognitive shifting, are well established and lend themselves to the analysis and quantification of cognitive demands (Drews and Doig, 2014; Holden et al., 2014; Mumma et al., 2024; Potter et al., 2005a; Redding and Robinson, 2009; Sitterding et al., 2014).

6 Limitations

Limitations of the study include the year restrictions on the literature review; however, the years chosen were well justified and were closer to the present time period. It is possible that observations in a different unit may have evidenced other, additional aspects; however, the investigators did find that the empirical data mirrored their own wide-ranging experiences in clinical work.

7 Conclusion

This analysis resulted in an innovative, expansive definition of “cognitive work” among nurses in acute care settings using a hybrid model approach. We identified three defining attributes: nursing cognitive work is complex, dynamic, nonlinear; multidimensional; and comprised of numerous mental processes. Findings emphasize that nursing cognitive work is individualized and context-dependent, with important implications for patients, nurses, and healthcare teams. This novel articulation offers clarity and insight into nursing labor and has the potential to support advancements in nursing theory, measurement, and healthcare safety interventions.

Ethics declaration

Informed consent and patient details

Written informed consent to take part in the study and to publish the article has been obtained from all participants or their legal representatives. The privacy rights of participants have been observed.

Studies in Human

This study was performed in compliance with relevant laws, regulatory frameworks and guidelines where the research took place.

The University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School granted an exemption. The authors provided the following explanation: The study was determined to carry no more than minimal risks to human subjects, equitable selection, and demonstrated a consent process.

Ethics approval statement

This research was conducted in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects. This study was reviewed and approved by the University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School Institutional Review Board (#00002228).

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Declarations

The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not reflect the position or policy of University of Massachusetts.

The views and information presented are those of the authors and do not represent the official position of the U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence, the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, or the Departments of Army, Department of Defense, or U.S. Government.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ellen Benjamin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Joanne Roman Jones: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Shelby Mueller: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Alexander Menard: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Priscilla Gazarian: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix Supplementary materials

Image, application 1

Image, application 2

Image, application 3

Image, application 4

Image, application 5

Image, application 6

Data availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank the nurses and staff for their support and participation in this work.

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ijnsa.2026.100644.


References

Alghamdi M.G. Nursing workload: a concept analysis J. Nurs. Manage 24 2016 449 457 10.1111/jonm.12354 26749124
Allen D. Nursing and the future of “care” in health care systems J. Health Serv. Res. Policy. 20 2015 129 130 10.1177/1355819615577806 25795110
Allen D. The Invisible Work of Nurses: Hospitals, organisation and healthcare Routledge Adv. in Health and Social Policy 2015
Allen D. What do you do at work? Profession building and doing nursing Int. Nurs. Rev. 54 2007 41 48 10.1111/j.1466-7657.2007.00496.x 17305956
Benjamin E. The work of patient flow management: A grounded theory study of emergency nurses Int. Emerg. Nurs. 74 2024 101457 10.1016/j.ienj.2024.101457 38744106
Benjamin E. Romain S. Vital C. They don’t know what it’s really like:” qualitative insights into inpatient cardiac nurses’ perceived workload BMC. Nurs. 24 2025 1083 10.1186/s12912-025-03723-4 40826455 PMC12363037
Benner P. From novice to expert excellence and power in clinical nursing practice Am. J. Nurs. 84 2 1984 https://journals.lww.com/ajnonline/fulltext/1984/12000/from_novice_to_expert_excellence_and_power_in.25.aspx
Braaten J.S. Original research: hospital system barriers to rapid response team activation: a cognitive work analysis Am. J. Nurs. 115 2015 22 32 10.1097/01.NAJ.0000460672.74447.4a 25588088
Browne J. Braden C.J. Nursing turbulence in critical care: relationships with nursing workload and patient safety Am. J. Crit. Care 29 2020 182 191 10.4037/ajcc2020180 32355966
Chervoni-Knapp T. The staffing shortage pandemic J. Radiol. Nurs. 41 2022 74 75 10.1016/j.jradnu.2022.02.007 35431684 PMC8989263
Cho H. Sagherian K. Steege L.M. Hospital staff nurse perceptions of resources and resource needs during the COVID-19 pandemic Nurs. Outlook. 71 2023 101984 10.1016/j.outlook.2023.101984 PMC10086098 37126868
Covidence Systematic Review Software Accessed November 19, 2025 www.covidence.org 2025
Dickman S.L. Himmelstein D.U. Woolhandler S. Inequality and the health-care system in the USA Lancet 389 2017 1431 1441 10.1016/s0140-6736(17)30398-7 28402825
Doyon O. Raymond L. Clinical reasoning and clinical judgment in nursing research: A bibliometric analysis Int. J. Nurs. Knowl. 36 2025 339 350 10.1111/2047-3095.12484 39056483 PMC12282499
Drews F.A. Doig A. Evaluation of a configural vital signs display for intensive care unit nurses Hum. Factors 56 2014 569 580 10.1177/0018720813499367 24930176
Falcó-Pegueroles A. Rodríguez-Martín D. Ramos-Pozón S. Zuriguel-Pérez E. Critical thinking in nursing clinical practice, education and research: From attitudes to virtue Nursing Philosophy 22 2021 e12332 10.1111/nup.12332 33029860
Flin R. O’Connor P. Safety at the sharp end: a guide to non-technical skills 2017 CRC Press London 10.1201/9781315607467
Galatzan B.J. Shan L. Johnson E. Patrician P.A. Perceptions of cognitive load and workload in nurse handoffs: a comparative study across differing patient-nurse ratios and acuity levels Comput. Inform. Nurs. 43 2025 e01216 10.1097/CIN.0000000000001216 39480166
Gazarian P.K. Use of the critical decision method in nursing research: an integrative review Adv Nurs Sci 36 2013 106 117 10.1097/ANS.0b013e3182901f8d 23644263
Gilardi S. Guglielmetti C. Pravettoni G. Interprofessional team dynamics and information flow management in emergency departments J. Adv. Nurs. 70 2014 1299 1309 10.1111/jan.12284 24138152
Gordon S. Nelson S. Moving beyond the virtue script in nursing: creating a knowledge-based identity for nurses Gordon S. Nelson S. The Complexities of Care, Nursing Reconsidered 2006 Cornell University Press 13 29
Griffiths P. Saville C. Ball J. Jones J. Pattison N. Monks T. Nursing workload, nurse staffing methodologies and tools: A systematic scoping review and discussion Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 103 2020 103487 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2019.103487 PMC7086229 31884330
Griffits S. Hines S. Moloney C. Characteristics and processes of registered nurses’ clinical reasoning and factors relating to the use of clinical reasoning in practice: a scoping review JBI. Evid. Synth. 21 2023 713 743 10.11124/JBIES-21-00373 36730096
Heydari A. Najar A.V. Bakhshi M. Resource management among intensive care nurses: an ethnographic study Mater. Sociomed. 27 2015 390 394 10.5455/msm.2015.27.390-394 26889097 PMC4733552
Holden R. Brown R. Scanlon M. Rivera A. Karsh B.-T. Micro- and macroergonomic changes in mental workload and medication safety following the implementation of new health IT Int. J. Ind. Ergon. 49 2014 10.1016/j.ergon.2014.04.003
Holden R.J. Carayon P. SEIPS 101 and seven simple SEIPS tools BMJ Qual. Saf. 30 2021 901 910 10.1136/bmjqs-2020-012538 PMC8543199 34039748
Hoonakker P. Carayon P. Gurses A. Brown R. McGuire K. Khunlertkit A. Walker J.M. Measuring workload of ICU nurses with a questionnaire survey: the NASA Task Load Index (TLX) IIe Trans. Healthc. Syst. Eng. 1 2011 131 143 10.1080/19488300.2011.609524 22773941 PMC3388621
Ihlebæk H.M. Lost in translation - Silent reporting and electronic patient records in nursing handovers: An ethnographic study Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 109 2020 e103636 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2020.103636 32593879
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in America Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century 2001 Washington DC
Jackson J. Anderson J.E. Maben J. What is nursing work? A meta-narrative review and integrated framework Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 122 2021 e103944 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2021.103944 34325358
Jennings B.M. Baernholdt M. Hopkinson S.G. Exploring the turbulent nature of nurses’ workflow Nurs. Outlook. 70 2022 440 450 10.1016/j.outlook.2022.01.002 35221055
Jessee M.A. An update on clinical judgment in nursing and implications for education, practice, and regulation J. Nurs. Regul. 12 2021 50 60 10.1016/S2155-8256(21)00116-2
Khullar D. Payment, priorities, and primary care: Can cognitive work be properly valued? JAMA, J. Am. Med. Assoc. 329 2023 635 636 10.1001/jama.2023.0880 36853258
Kissler M.J. Porter S. Knees M. Kissler K. Keniston A. Burden M. Attention among health care professionals Ann. Intern. Med. 177 2024 941 952 10.7326/M23-3229 38885508 PMC11457735
Krupp A. Steege L. Lee J. Lopez K.D. King B. Supporting decision-making about patient mobility in the intensive care unit nurse work environment: Work domain analysis JMIR. Nurs. 5 2022 e41051 10.2196/41051 PMC9555320 36166282
Lee W. Jang I. Effect of nurses’ professionalism, work environment, and communication with health professionals on patient safety culture (ahrq 2.0.): A cross-sectional multicenter study J. Nurs. Manage 2023 2023 1591128 10.1155/2023/1591128 PMC11918523 40225614
Liu Q. Lu Y. Zhai S. Dai C. Kan C. Chen C. Workflow interruptions, perceived workload and missed nursing: Their impact on nurses’ health status-a structural equation model J. Adv. Nurs. 82 2026 311 320 10.1111/jan.16855 39991959
Lopez K.D. Gerling G.J. Cary M.P. Kanak M.F. Cognitive work analysis to evaluate the problem of patient falls in an inpatient setting J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 17 2010 313 321 10.1136/jamia.2009.000422 20442150 PMC2945713
Marshall D.C. Finlayson M.P. Identifying the nontechnical skills required of nurses in general surgical wards J. Clin. Nurs. 27 2018 1475 1487 10.1111/jocn.14290 29399903
McLane S. Turley J.P. Esquivel A. Engebretson J. Smith K.A. Wood G.L. Zhang J. Concept analysis of cognitive artifacts ANS Adv. Nurs. Sci. 33 2010 352 362 10.1097/ANS.0b013e3181fb2ed6 21068556
Meyer G. Lavin M.A. Vigilance: the essence of nursing Online J. Issues. Nurs. 10 2005 8 10.3912/OJIN.Vol10No03PPT01 16225388
Morineau T. Djenidi-Delfour M. Arnault F. Designing affordance-based procedures using heuristic cognitive work analysis: application to triage in an emergency department J. Cogn. Eng. Decis. Mak. 15 2021 198 212 10.1177/15553434211029531
Morineau T. Flach J.M. The heuristic version of cognitive work analysis: A first application to medical emergency situations Appl. Ergon. 79 2019 98 106 10.1016/j.apergo.2018.07.008 30031520
Morris R. MacNeela P. Scott A. Treacy P. Hyde A. Reconsidering the conceptualization of nursing workload: literature review J. Adv. Nurs. 57 2007 463 471 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2006.04134.x 17284279
Mount-Campbell A.F. Evans K.D. Woods D.D. Chipps E.M. Moffatt-Bruce S.D. Patterson E.S. Value and usage of a workaround artifact: A cognitive work analysis of “brains” use by hospital nurses J. Cogn. Eng. Decis. Mak. 13 2019 67 80 10.1177/1555343418825429 33024425 PMC7535084
Mumma J.M. Weaver B.W. Morgan J.S. Ghassemian G. Gannon P.R. Burke K.B. Berryhill B.A. MacKay R.E. Lee L. Kraft C.S. Connecting pathogen transmission and healthcare worker cognition: a cognitive task analysis of infection prevention and control practices during simulated patient care BMJ Qual. Saf. 33 2024 419 431 10.1136/bmjqs-2023-016230 PMC11228200 38050151
National Academy of Medicine The Future of Nursing 2020-2030: Charting a Path to Achieve Health Equity 2021 The National Academies Press Washington, DC 34524769
Ng L.S. Curley M.A. One more thing to think about…” Cognitive burden experienced by intensive care unit nurses when implementing a tight glucose control protocol J. Diabetes. Sci. Technol. 6 2012 58 64 10.1177/193229681200600108 22401323 PMC3320822
Nibbelink C.W. Brewer B.B. Decision-making in nursing practice: An integrative literature review J. Clin. Nurs. 27 2018 917 928 10.1111/jocn.14151 29098746 PMC5867219
O’Brien B.C. Harris I.B. Beckman T.J. Reed D.A. Cook D.A. Standards for reporting qualitative research: a synthesis of recommendations Acad. Med. 89 2014 1245 1251 10.1097/ACM.0000000000000388 24979285
Patel R.H. Goldin J. Medical Error Prevention and Root Cause Analysis StatPearls [Internet] 2026 StatPearls Publishing Treasure Island (FL) 34033400
Pfrimmer D.M. Johnson M.R. Guthmiller M.L. Lehman J.L. Ernste V.K. Rhudy L.M. Surveillance: A nursing intervention for improving patient safety in critical care environment Dimens. Crit. Care Nurs. 36 2017 45 52 10.1097/dcc.0000000000000217 27902662
Potter P. Wolf L. Boxerman S. Grayson D. Sledge J. Dunagan C. Evanoff B. Understanding the cognitive work of nursing in the acute care environment J. Nurs. Adm. 35 2005 327 335 16077274
Potter P. Wolf L. Boxerman S. Grayson D. Sledge J. Dunagan C. Evanoff B. An analysis of nurses’ cognitive work: A new perspective for understanding medical errors Henriksen K. Battles J.B. Marks E.S. Lewin D.I. Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to Implementation (Volume 1: Research Findings) 2005 Advances in Patient Safety. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US) Rockville (MD) 21249809
Redding D.A. Robinson S. Interruptions and geographic challenges to nurses’ cognitive workload J. Nurs. Care Qual. 24 2009 194 200 10.1097/01.Ncq.0000356907.95076.31 quiz 201–2 19525759
Rhudy L.M. Androwich I. Surveillance as an intervention in the care of stroke patients J. Neurosci. Nurs. 45 2013 10.1097/JNN.0b013e31829db987 262-71 24025465
Rodgers, B., 2011. The evolution of nursing science, in: Philosophies and theories for advanced nursing practice. Jones & Bartlett Learning, pp. 19–49.
Rosseter, R., 2026. Nursing workforce fact sheet. American Association of Colleges of Nursing. Accessed April 18, 2025. https://www.aacnnursing.org/news-data/fact-sheets/nursing-workforce-fact-sheet#:~:text=Nursing%20is%20the%20nation's%20largest,registered%20nurses%20(RNs)%20nationwide.
Schwartz-Barcott D. Kim H.S. An expansion and elaboration of the hybrid model of concept development Rodgers Beth L. Knafl Kahleen A. Concept Development in Nursing 2000 Saunders 129 159
Sitterding M.C. Ebright P. Broome M. Patterson E.S. Wuchner S. Situation awareness and interruption handling during medication administration West J. Nurs. Res. 36 2014 891 916 10.1177/0193945914533426 24823968
Stenseth H.V. Steindal S.A. Solberg M.T. Ølnes M.A. Mohallem A. Sørensen A.L. Strandell-Laine C. Olaussen C. Aure C.F. Riegel F. Pedersen I. Zlamal J. Martini J.G. Bresolin P. Linnerud S.C.W. Nes A.A.G. Simulation-based learning supported by technology to enhance critical thinking in nursing students: Protocol for a scoping review JMIR. Res. Protoc. 11 2022 e36725 10.2196/36725 PMC9016502 35373777
Tanner C.A. Thinking like a nurse: a research-based model of clinical judgment in nursing J. Nurs. Educ. 45 2006 204 211 10.3928/01484834-20060601-04 16780008
Varvani Farahani P. Ozturk C. Carew A. The effect of super brain yoga on concentration, memory, and academic progress in nursing students: A quasi-experimental study Int. J. Community Based. Nurs. Midwifery. 12 2024 218 227 10.30476/ijcbnm.2024.101697.2440 39411572 PMC11472122
Wikström A.C. Larsson U.S. Technology–an actor in the ICU: a study in workplace research tradition J. Clin. Nurs. 13 2004 555 561 10.1111/j.1365-2702.2004.00899.x 15189408
Wisner K. Chesla C.A. Spetz J. Lyndon A. Managing the tension between caring and charting: Labor and delivery nurses’ experiences of the electronic health record Res. Nurs. Health 44 2021 822 832 10.1002/nur.22177 34402080
Wisner K. Lyndon A. Chesla C.A. The electronic health record’s impact on nurses’ cognitive work: An integrative review Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 94 2019 74 84 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2019.03.003 30939418
Zuriguel Pérez E. Lluch Canut M.T. Falcó Pegueroles A. Puig Llobet M. Moreno Arroyo C. Roldán Merino J. Critical thinking in nursing: Scoping review of the literature Int. J. Nurs. Pract. 21 2015 820 830 10.1111/ijn.12347 24821020
