
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Mol Ther Adv
Journal ID: Mol Ther Adv
NLM Journal ID: 9919257804006676

Molecular Therapy Advances

EISSN: 3117-387X
Publisher: American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13499122
PMID: 42633127
DOI: 10.1016/j.omta.2026.201824
Article ID: S3117-387X(26)00159-X
Article ID: 201824
Article version: 1
Subjects: Original Article

GAA engineered to improve cellular uptake enhances correction in a preclinical hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy model of Pompe disease

Wantuch Slawomir 1 2
Tuske Steven 3
Benedetti Sara 1
Mehta Nickita 3
Brudvig Jon J. 3
Do Hung 3
Gotschall Russell 3
Feng Jessie 3
Gaspar Anna B. 2
Recchi Chiara 2
Heal Paul 2
Johnson Tyler B. 3
Mavilio Fulvio 2
Sagoo Pervinder 2
Weimer Jill M. 3
Gaspar H. Bobby h.gaspar@ucl.ac.uk 1 2 ∗
1 Molecular and Cellular Immunology, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK
2 Orchard Therapeutics (Europe) Limited, London W6 8PW, UK
3 Amicus Therapeutics, Inc., Princeton, NJ 08542, USA
∗ Corresponding author: H. Bobby Gaspar, Molecular and Cellular Immunology, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK. h.gaspar@ucl.ac.uk
Publication date: 2026 Sep 10
Electronic publication date: 2026 Jul 30
Volume: 34
Issue: 3
Electronic Location ID: 201824
Received 2026 Feb 6; Revised 2026 May 1; Accepted 2026 Jul 28
Copyright: © 2026 The Author(s)
Copyright year: 2026
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: Pompe disease, variant insulin growth factor-2 tag, hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy, ex vivo gene therapy

==============================
Pompe disease (PD) is a severe autosomal-recessive lysosomal storage disorder in which deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme function results in glycogen accumulation and a spectrum of clinically severe neuromuscular disease. Enzyme replacement therapy is the standard of care for PD, although its efficacy is limited by inefficient uptake by cells in target organs. Autologous transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), genetically modified ex vivo with lentiviral vectors (LVVs), allows secretion and systemic delivery of lysosomal enzymes and has resulted in clinical correction of severe neurometabolic diseases. We evaluated the potential of HSC gene therapy to correct GAA deficiency in a murine model of PD. To improve lysosomal delivery, we engineered a novel GAA transgene by adding a peptide tag targeting the insulin-like growth factor 2 binding domain (vIGF2-GAA). Transplantation of Gaa−/− HSCs genetically modified to express vIGF2-GAA into Gaa−/− recipient mice resulted in sustained systemic levels of engineered GAA. Reduction of glycogen accumulation in muscle tissues and brain confirmed the superior activity of vIGF2-GAA compared to wild-type (WT) GAA, lowering urine glucose tetrasaccharide levels and correcting skeletal and cardiac phenotypes. These results demonstrate the therapeutic advantage of delivering engineered vIGF2-GAA and support the clinical translation of HSC gene therapy for PD.

Graphical abstract

This study evaluated ex vivo lentiviral-mediated autologous HSC gene therapy to correct acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme deficiency in a murine model of Pompe disease. Efficacy was achieved using a rationally designed recombinant GAA enzyme with superior uptake and lysosomal targeting by an optimized IGF2R tag (vIGF2-GAA) compared to wild-type GAA.

Introduction

Pompe disease (PD) is a rare, autosomal-recessive lysosomal storage disease (LSD) caused by mutations in the gene encoding the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme, which results in pathogenic accumulation of glycogen within cells.1 Patients with severe infantile-onset PD (IOPD) have null or highly deleterious mutations and less than 2% of normal GAA levels; they commonly present with symptoms of hypotonia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and often die within the first years of life due to respiratory or cardiac failure.2 Late-onset PD (LOPD) represents a milder form of the disease with higher residual GAA activity, often caused by less deleterious mutations. Patients with LOPD eventually require intervention to support declining respiratory and neuromotor functions and have an overall reduced life expectancy.1,3 The current standard of care for PD is enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), which is not curative and requires patients to receive lifelong infusions of recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) to slow disease progression.

rhGAA enters cells by binding to the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR; gene name IGF2R), which has separate high-affinity binding sites for bis-mannose-6-phosphate (M6P)-bearing N-glycans and insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2). Binding of rhGAA to CI-MPR triggers receptor-mediated endocytosis and lysosomal transport. The overall efficacy of ERT is, however, limited by the relatively low abundance of CI-MPR on skeletal and cardiac muscle cells and the low abundance of M6P on first-generation ERT. Second-generation ERTs (avalglucosidase alfa and cipaglucosidase alfa with miglustat) have focused on improving lysosomal delivery of rhGAA by increasing its M6P content and stability.4 An alternative approach is based on targeting the higher-affinity IGF2 binding domain of the CI-MPR through the addition of an IGF2-derived peptide to GAA, which improved glycogen clearance in a murine model of PD.5 In a clinical setting, administration of an IGF2-tagged rhGAA (reveglucosidase alfa) improved respiratory function and walking endurance in patients with LOPD.6 However, off-target binding of IGF2-GAA and activation of both the insulin receptor (INSR) and the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) reduced the amount of GAA available to lysosomes and resulted in hypoglycemia (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01924845). In addition, rhGAA can be highly immunogenic in patients with no endogenous GAA synthesis (cross-reactive immunologic material, CRIM negative), resulting in the generation of neutralizing antibodies that further reduce ERT efficacy.7 Overall, the efficacy of ERT for long-term management of PD remains limited, also due to inefficient trafficking of rhGAA across the blood-brain barrier and consequently poor correction of the CNS manifestations of the disease, particularly in patients with IOPD.8

Gene therapy may provide a potentially curative treatment for PD. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors have been used to deliver recombinant GAA to affected tissues via either local or systemic administration. However, systemic AAV-mediated gene therapy has been associated with significant toxicity, limiting its therapeutic potential.9,10 In addition, AAV treatment durability, a potential concern particularly for younger patients, has yet to be clinically demonstrated.11 Hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy (HSC-GT) using lentiviral (LV)-mediated transduction of autologous HSCs has been shown to be an effective treatment for neurometabolic diseases such as X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), and mucopolysaccharidosis type 1 (MPS-I).12,13,14 For those diseases, efficacy is mediated by the systemic and local secretion of therapeutic proteins bymacrophages and brain-penetrating microglial-like progeny of transduced HSCs, resulting in enzyme uptake and cross-correction of target tissues, primarily the CNS.15,16 HSC-GT has also demonstrated therapeutic efficacy in murine models of PD.17,18,19,20 However, reduction of glycogen accumulation and phenotypic correction in those studies was limited by insufficient GAA uptake, despite the use of strong viral promoters to express the recombinant enzyme.18,19,20

In this study, we have combined autologous HSC-GT with expression of an engineered GAA bearing a variant IGF2 (vIGF2) tag to enable highly efficient uptake by the IGF2R. Off-target interactions of vIGF2-GAA with insulin and IGF1Rs were minimized through rational protein design, and expression and secretion further optimized by signal peptide engineering. Transplantation of HSCs transduced with an LV vector (LVV) expressing vIGF2-GAA under the control of a constitutive cellular promoter achieved robust correction of PD biochemical, histopathological, and functional phenotypes in the skeletal muscle, heart, and CNS of Gaa−/− mice, outperforming the wild-type (WT) GAA gene expressed by an identical LVV.

Results

Engineering a GAA transgene for enhanced cellular uptake and lysosomal trafficking by IGF2 targeting

As a prerequisite for enabling HSC-GT for PD, we engineered GAA to improve its delivery and lysosomal targeting. WT-GAA is poorly phosphorylated with bis-M6P in the Golgi and therefore inefficiently endocytosed by CI-MPR.19 To achieve glycosylation-independent uptake of GAA, we exploited the high-affinity binding (∼100 nM) of IGF2 to CI-MPR.20 We designed a vIGF2 tag (aa 1–67) in which we deleted amino acids 1–4 at the N terminus (Figure 1A). This change was based on work by Lebowitz et al.,21 which demonstrated that deletion of residues 1–7 reduced binding to IGF1R and IGF1 binding proteins. Internal work at Amicus Therapeutics revealed that deletion of residues 1–4 was sufficient to abolish IGF1R binding, as shown in Figure 1B. Substitution of E6R has been reported to reduce binding to IGF1R and IGF1 binding proteins.22 The Y27L substitution was shown to reduce the binding affinity of IGF2 to both IGF1 and INSRs by more than 80-fold,23 and this effect is confirmed by the complete absence of detectable IGF1 and INSR binding to vIGF2, which was evaluated using bio-layer interferometry (BLI; Figure 1B; Table S1). As expected, WT-IGF2 exhibited a high-affinity interaction with CI-MPR (KD = 0.9 nM) and moderate affinity for IGF1R (KD = 77 nM) and INSR (KD = 100 nM). Consistent with the mutation strategy, vIGF2 maintained a high-affinity interaction with CI-MPR (KD = 0.2 nM) but did not exhibit detectable binding to IGF1R or INSR. Importantly, binding kinetics were maintained in the presence of 1 mM M6P (KD = 0.18 nM), consistent with an M6P-independent interaction mediated by the IGF2 binding domain of CI-MPR (Table S1).Figure 1 Characterization of engineered vIGF2-GAA protein

(A) Amino acid (aa) structure of unmodified (WT-GAA) and variant IGF2 (vIGF2). Top: original aa sequence; bottom: variant with aa substitutions engineered for enhanced binding specificity to IGF2R described in text (highlighted). (B) Biolayer interferometry (Octet) binding sensograms of vIGF2-GAA binding specificity to CI-MPR/IGF2R/M6PR, insulin, and IGF1 receptors. The vIGF2 construct does not bind the insulin or IGF1 receptors, and high-affinity binding to the IGF2 receptor is blocked in the presence of 1 mM free M6P. Color legend correspond as follows: IGF2/M6PR analysis, IGF2 concentrations evaluated 8 (blue), 4 (red), 2 (light blue), 1 (green), 0.5 (yellow), 0.25 (purple), and 0.125 (teal) nM; insulin/IGF1 receptor analysis, IGF2 concentrations evaluated 375 (blue), 250 (red), 125 (light blue), 63 (green), 50 (yellow), 38 (purple), and 25 (teal) nM. (C) Schematic representation of engineered vIGF2-GAA construct showing modified regions with BiP secretion signal peptide for increased secretion, vIGF2 for specific CI-MPR/IGF2R/M6PR binding, 2GS linker, and codon-optimized human GAA. (D) Enhanced secretion of vIGF2-GAA containing the BiP signal peptide compared to WT-GAA. The presence of the BiP signal sequence increases its secretion as measured for enzyme activity in CHO conditioned culture media. (E) CI-MPR binding of unmodified (WT-GAA) and vIGF2-GAA. CI-MPR immobilized to a 96-well plate binds vIGF2-GAA independently of free M6P (magenta and light blue). WT-GAA does not bind CI-MPR well with or without M6P, presumably due to low levels of bis-M6P-containing glycans (orange). Binding in the presence of free CI-MPR (M6PR) blocks binding of all constructs (blue). (F and G) Cell uptake of WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA. L6 rat myoblasts were incubated in the presence of CHO cell culture media expressing WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA, normalized for total protein and enzyme activity. The vIGF2-GAA construct (F, yellow) shows greater total uptake into L6 myoblasts as measured by internalized enzyme activity compared to unmodified GAA (orange). (G) Uptake of vIGF2-GAA into cells is blocked by free CI-MPR but not free M6P.

We also made a conservative lysine-to-arginine substitution at position 65 to prevent potential chemical crosslinking within the receptor-binding portion of the tag (Figure 1A). The tag was fused to a 10 amino acid glycine/serine linker and to amino acids 61–952 of a codon-optimized hGAA, where the N-terminal sequence, corresponding to the signal peptide and pro-peptide of GAA that are removed upon secretion, was deleted. We added at the N-terminus the signal peptide sequence from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone BiP at the N terminus, which improves secretion compared to the WT-GAA24 (Figure 1C). As GAA is cleaved at amino acid 57 in the endo-lysosomal pathway,25 this design was intended to facilitate tag and linker cleavage prior to lysosomal delivery, reducing any potential for impaired glycogen hydrolysis.

The vIGF2-GAA chimeric fusion protein was efficiently expressed by transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and secreted in the conditioned medium (data not shown). Analysis of GAA enzymatic activity showed that the engineered vIGF2-GAA was secreted at higher levels compared to GAA (Figure 1D). In a plate binding assay mimicking CI-MPR-mediated uptake, vIGF2-GAA bound immobilized CI-MPR at low nM concentrations and subsequently hydrolyzed a synthetic substrate (4-methylumbelliferyl-α-D-glucopyranoside [4-MU-Glc]), while GAA exhibited very little binding, reflecting low M6P content in the context of overexpression (Figure 1E). Interestingly, while the addition of 5 mM M6P to the plate binding reaction entirely ablated the binding of WT-GAA, 5 mM M6P increased the binding of vIGF2-GAA. In a cell-based uptake assay, culture of Gaa−/− L6 rat myoblasts with conditioned medium derived from WT-GAA- or vIGF2-GAA-transfected CHO cells showed a significantly higher GAA activity in the latter, confirming that vIGF2-GAA outperforms GAA for cellular uptake (Figure 1F). Also in this assay, the addition of M6P ablated GAA activity in Gaa−/− L6 myoblast lysates exposed to WT-GAA but increased activity in lysates exposed to vIGF2-GAA. The addition of M6PR ablated activity in both conditions, consistent with competitive receptor occupancy blocking the IGF2-binding and M6P-binding sites (Figure 1G). Together, these results predict an increased therapeutic potential of vIGF2-GAA over GAA upon systemic delivery in patients with PD.

Enhanced uptake and glycogen clearance activity of vIGF2-GAA in GAA-deficient myotube culture

We next sought to test LV-mediated expression and activity of vIGF2-GAA, as well as uptake by, and cross-correction of, GAA-deficient cells. We generated self-inactivating, third-generation LVs26 using the human constitutive phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK) promoter to express cDNAs encoding either the human full-length GAA or vIGF2-GAA (Figures 2A and 2B). The vectors were used to transduce the human leukemic cell line K562 (MOI 10). Western blot analysis of transduced K562 showed the presence of both processed lysosomal (76 kDa) and glycosylated precursor (110 kDa) isoforms in cell lysates and secretion of the glycosylated precursor isoform only in supernatants (Figure 2C). Quantitative analysis of the relative levels of cellular and secreted proteins indicated higher secretion efficiency of the engineered vIGF2-GAA (Figure 2D). To determine whether the N-terminal modifications in vIGF2-GAA affected post-translational modifications, and particularly glycosylation, GAA proteins were purified from culture media of transduced K562 cells and treated with glycosidase enzymes. Western blot analysis indicated no differences in the glycosylation profile between secreted WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA (Figure 2E), indicating that the higher secretion of the engineered GAA was likely mediated by the BiP sequence replacing the native secretion signal. GAA enzymatic activity was measured in the culture medium as previously described27 and normalized to cell number and vector copy number (VCN) (Figure 2F). The assay demonstrated 2- to 5-fold higher enzymatic activity per copy number for vIGF2-GAA than for GAA, which we attributed to higher enzyme secretion.Figure 2 In vitro characterization of engineered vIGF2-GAA activity

(A and B) Schematic representation of third-generation self-inactivating lentiviral constructs with wild-type human GAA (WT-GAA) transgene or fusion-tagged vIGF2-GAA transgene (PGK promoter, BiP [binding immunoglobulin protein signal peptide], vIGF2 [variant insulin growth factor 2], 2GS protein linker, coGAA codon-optimized truncated GAA gene). (C and D) Western blot analysis and quantification of cellular and secreted GAA proteins (anti-hGAA antibody) from untransduced (Untransd.) K562 cells and K562 cells transduced with WTGAA or vIGF2-GAA, with comparable vector copy numbers (VCNs 4.2 and 3.0, respectively). (C) GAA protein levels were assessed in cell pellets and corresponding culture media by capillary western analysis (Jess). Bands at the expected molecular weights for glycosylated precursor and processed lysosomal GAA species are shown for each construct in cell lysates (cellular) and cell culture supernatant (secreted). Total protein detection (blue dots) was used to confirm loading for cell pellets; culture medium samples were normalized by cell number and culture volume (2 × 106 cells in 500 μL RPMI), and equal volumes (5 μL) were loaded per lane. (D) Quantification of GAA signal intensity in cell pellets and culture media separately, as well as combined GAA signal (cell pellet + media) detected by capillary western analysis. (E) Western blot analysis of secreted GAA proteins from K562 cells transduced with WTGAA or vIGF2-GAA, following treatment with glycosidases, EndoH, or PNGase F (red line indicates 100 kDa marker). (F) Enzymatic activity of secreted GAA protein in culture media from K562 transduced with WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA lentiviral vectors (normalized to cell number and VCN). (G and H) Transwell assay to quantify GAA uptake by C2C12 Gaa−/− myotubes, derived from K562 cells transduced with LVV encoding WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA. (I) Detection of cellular glycogen in C2C12 WT and Gaa−/− cell lysates after 48 h of culture in normal or glucose- and glutamate- (Glu-reduced) reduced medium (n = 2). (J and K) Detection of cellular glycogen in C2C12 Gaa−/− cells exposed to cell culture media derived from K562 cells transduced with LVV WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA to evaluate the impact of GAA protein uptake and lysosomal activity. Ctrl, untransduced K562 cells; addition of M6P protein for competitive inhibition, +M6P. All data shown are presented as mean ± SD and is representative of at least 2–3 independent experiments. Statistical analysis: one-way ANOVA.

To assess the uptake efficiency of vIGF2-GAA compared to WT-GAA, murine C2C12 Gaa−/− myoblasts were differentiated into myotubes in culture and exposed to transduced K562 cell supernatants in a transwell assay. The assay allows quantitative assessment of the uptake of GAA secreted by the transduced K562 cells through the CI-MPRs expressed by C2C12 myotubes. The GAA binding motif used for receptor-mediated endocytosis was further confirmed by adding exogenous saturating levels of M6P to cell cultures for competitive inhibition. GAA activity was analyzed in C2C12 Gaa−/− myotube cell lysates after 48 h of transwell culture. Uptake and activity of vIGF2-GAA were significantly higher than WT-GAA and remained unaffected after addition of exogenous M6P (Figures 2G and 2H), confirming that vIGF2-GAA uptake via available IGF2-binding domains is sustained and therefore independent of M6P binding. The enhanced cellular uptake and lysosomal trafficking of vIGF2-GAA compared to WT-GAA was also confirmed by detection of the processed 76 kDa lysosomal isoform of GAA in C2C12 Gaa−/− myotube cell lysates after 48 h of transwell culture (Figure S1). Both GAA activity (p = 0.09) and glycogen content (p = 0.38) of C2C12 Gaa−/− myotubes, in transwell cultures of WT-GAA-transduced K562, were minimally impacted by the addition of M6P.

Analysis of C2C12 Gaa−/− myotube glycogen content was performed to confirm lysosomal trafficking and activity of endocytosed GAA enzymes. For initial characterization of cellular glycogen, detected using a fluorometric detection kit, C2C12 WT and Gaa−/− myotubes were cultured in glucose- and glutamate-reduced medium, supplemented with dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS) to reduce any cellular energy sources and promote a corresponding reduction in cellular glycogen stores. Under energy starvation conditions, WT myotubes showed complete depletion of cellular glycogen due to both cytosolic and lysosomal glycogen-degrading enzymes, while only partial reduction of glycogen was observed in Gaa−/− myotubes (Figure 2I). Analysis of glycogen concentration in Gaa−/− myotubes cocultured with transduced K562 in transwells showed highly efficient uptake, lysosomal trafficking, and enzymatic activity of vIGF2-GAA, resulting in complete degradation of cellular glycogen compared to GAA (Figures 2J and 2K). These data confirm the enhanced capacity of vIGF2-GAA in correcting GAA deficiency through efficient secretion, uptake, and lysosomal targeting.

To confirm the safety and expression of LVV-derived GAA expression within translationally relevant cell types, we transduced primary human CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) isolated from mobilized blood of healthy donors with LVV constructs expressing WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA (Figure S2). Characterization of LVV WT-GAA- and vIGF2-GAA-transduced human CD34+ cells and their in-vitro-differentiated myeloid progeny confirmed that the expression and release of GAA enzymes by transduced HSPCs (VCN range: 5.6–7.7) were not associated with toxicity or any impact on clonogenic potential or differentiation. Similar to transduced K562 cells, these results also showed significantly enhanced secretion of vIGF2-GAA relative to WT-GAA by both CD34+-derived myeloid liquid cultures (4- to 5-fold) and monocyte-macrophage cultures (2.9- to 5.8-fold), detected by GAA activity analysis of culture supernatants. These data support the clinical translation of vIGF2-GAA for LV-mediated modification of human CD34+ HSPCs.

Restoration of GAA enzymatic activity and correction of glycogen accumulation by vIGF2-GAA after HSC-GT in a murine model of PD

To assess the therapeutic potential of vIGF2-GAA to prevent disease phenotype development in a relevant PD animal model, we transplanted autologous HSCs transduced with the vIGF2-GAA LVV into Gaa−/− (B6;129-Gaatm1Rabn/J) mice after myeloablative conditioning (Figure 3A). These mice exhibit the biochemical, pathological, and neuromuscular phenotypic characteristics of PD, enabling an evaluation of the effect of HSC-GT on skeletal muscle, heart, and CNS pathology28 (Figure 3B). 8- to 12-week-old female Gaa−/− recipients were conditioned with a myeloablative dose of busulfan and transplanted with Gaa−/− male donor-derived HSPCs transduced ex vivo with LVVs expressing either vIGF2-GAA or GAA (Table S2). Untreated WT and Gaa−/− mouse cohorts were included as controls. All animals were sacrificed 3 months after transplantation. PCR detection of the Y chromosome in bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) revealed ≥95% donor cell chimerism in all mice (Table S3), with no observed toxicities or adverse impact on normal hematopoietic differentiation and immune reconstitution in mice (Figure S3), reinforcing provisional safety observations of the use of vIGF2-GAA in an experimental HSC-GT setting. Comparable VCNs were observed in both BM and PBMCs isolated from HSC-GT-treated mice (mean VCNs of 4.9 and 4.4 in vIGF2-GAA and 5.1 and 4.5 in GAA cohorts, respectively). Both groups showed comparable levels of GAA enzymatic activity in hematopoietic cells from either BM or PB (Table S3).Figure 3 In vivo murine model of HSC-GT for evaluation of cross-correction of Pompe disease phenotype

(A) Schematic of Lin− HSPC collection from Gaa−/− donor mice, processing, and transplantation following busulfan preconditioning of Gaa−/− recipient mice. (B) Overview of study timeline and terminal endpoint analyses. (C) GAA activity (nmol/mg/h) in homogenized heart and skeletal muscle. Data shown are pooled from 3 independent experimental cohorts (each symbol represents individual experimental animals) and are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis: two-way ANOVA.

Analysis of GAA activity in heart, gastrocnemius (posterior calf), and tibialis anterior (anterior leg) muscles showed significant restoration of GAA activity in Gaa−/− mice transplanted with cells expressing either vIGF2-GAA or GAA (Figure 3C). GAA activity levels ranged from 10% to 40% of those measured in WT animals, except for the diaphragm, where reconstitution was more pronounced, albeit with greater variation among individual mice.

To assess whether the observed levels of GAA activity were able to achieve therapeutic correction of glycogen accumulation in relevant tissues of treated animals, we performed histopathological and quantitative measurement of tissue glycogen content. Histological sections of heart, diaphragm, gastrocnemius, and tibialis anterior were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), diastase-PAS, and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (Figure 4A). Untreated Gaa−/− animals displayed abundant PAS-positive staining in all tissues examined, indicating substantial glycogen accumulation, while tissues from WT animals showed minimal or absent PAS staining. Tissues from both WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA cohorts showed significant reduction of PAS staining levels, although the vIGF2-GAA cohort showed a significantly lower PAS signal, comparable to that of WT-GAA mice (Figure 4A).Figure 4 Engineered vIGF2-GAA delivers significant cross-correction in heart and skeletal muscle of gene therapy-treated Gaa−/− animals

(A) Histopathology of corresponding tissues using H&E and PAS (periodic acid-Schiff) staining, which appears in a bright magenta/pink, punctate and vacuolated pattern. Scale bars indicate 200 μM. (B–E) Glycogen content (μg/mg) in the same tissues assessed biochemically. Skeletal muscle sections included the diaphragm, tibialis anterior, and gastrocnemius. Data shown are pooled from 3 independent experimental cohorts (each symbol represents individual experimental animals) and are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis: one-way ANOVA.

To provide quantitative confirmation to these observations, we measured glycogen concentrations within tissue homogenates (Figures 4B–4E; Table S4). As expected, WT animals exhibited low or undetectable levels of glycogen across all tissues, while Gaa−/− mice showed significant glycogen accumulation. Tissues from mice in the WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA cohorts showed significantly lower glycogen content compared to untreated Gaa−/− mice (Figures 4B–4E). Analysis confirmed the higher efficacy of vIGF2-GAA in preventing glycogen accumulation, which achieved a 70%–99% reduction in glycogen accumulation compared to untreated Gaa−/− mice, restoring tissue glycogen levels comparable to WT mice (Table S4). In particular, reduction of glycogen levels in the vIGF2-GAA cohort averaged 96.8% in the heart, 92.6% in the gastrocnemius, 83.3% in the tibialis anterior, and 76.0% in the diaphragm, compared to a more modest reduction (41%–64%) across all tissues in the WT-GAA cohort. These data suggest that vIGF2-GAA achieves better cellular uptake and lysosomal targeting than WT-GAA when delivered systemically through HSC-GT to produce therapeutically relevant levels of GAA, allowing a more profound correction of glycogen accumulation in critical organs and correction of pathological features of PD.

Expression of vIGF2-GAA prevents glycogen accumulation in the CNS

Preclinical and clinical studies showed that HSC-GT enables correction of neurometabolic diseases through the engraftment of gene-corrected microglial-like cells and precursors in the CNS and functional cross-correction of neuronal pathology.29,30 To investigate whether this mechanism can prevent glycogen accumulation and neuronal damage in the CNS of PD mice, we analyzed brain tissue from transplanted Gaa−/− mice from the vIGF2-GAA and WT-GAA cohorts. Analysis of GAA activity showed reconstitution of enzyme levels up to 4.5% and 2.5% of those observed in WT mice, respectively (Figure 5A). Histological examination of the cortex, brainstem, and sagittal brain sections at sacrifice showed strong PAS staining within all brain compartments in Gaa−/− mice, which was dramatically reduced in tissues from the vIGF2-GAA cohort (Figures 5B and 5C). The reduction was less pronounced in the WT-GAA cohort. Biochemical analysis of brain tissue homogenates confirmed a statistically significant reduction (∼83%) of glycogen accumulation in the brain of mice from the vIGF2-GAA cohort, at levels comparable (p > 0.3) to those observed in WT mice (Table S4; Figure 5D). Mice in the WT-GAA cohort showed a more modest (∼40%) reduction in tissue glycogen, which was not comparable to that of WT mice (p < 0.0001) (Table S4; Figure 5D). These data show that even the modest increase in GAA activity achieved in the brain of Gaa−/− mice treated with vIGF2-GAA, but not WT-GAA, is sufficient to prevent CNS accumulation of glycogen in this model.Figure 5 Significant cross-correction of the brain delivered by vIGF2-GAA construct

(A) GAA activity (nmol/mg/h) in homogenized brain at endpoint. (B and C) Histopathology of corresponding sections (cortex, brainstem, and sagittal brain) stained with H&E and PAS (periodic acid-Schiff), which appears in a bright magenta/pink, punctate and vacuolated pattern. Scale bars indicate 200 μM for cortex and brainstem and 2 mM for sagittal brain images. (D) Biochemical quantification of glycogen (μg/mg) in the same tissues. Data shown are pooled from 3 independent experimental cohorts (each symbol represents individual experimental animals) and are presented as mean ± SD; statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA where indicated.

Functional correction of the PD phenotype by HSC-GT

To evaluate the impact of HSC-GT on the murine PD phenotype, we performed in-life functional assays of motor coordination by a rotarod test (Figure 6A) and cardiac function by echocardiography (Figures 6B–6H) 3 months after transplantation. For rotarod testing, each animal underwent five consecutive trials. As expected, the untreated Gaa−/− group exhibited a significantly shorter latency to fall from the rotarod (90 ± 32 s) compared to WT mice (132 ± 42 s; p < 0.0004) (Figure 6A). Gaa−/− mice transplanted with cells expressing vIGF2-GAA showed a significant improvement in latency compared to untreated littermates (146 ± 60 s; p < 0.0006), a performance indistinguishable from that of WT mice, while mice in the WT-GAA cohort showed no statistically significant improvement (129 ± 69 s; p = 0.21). Of note, animals in all study groups showed no significant difference in body weight that could bias the test results (data not shown).Figure 6 Correction of motor and cardiac function in HSC-GT-treated Gaa−/− mice

(A) Rotarod performance test: each animal underwent five trials with 3 min rest intervals; only the final three runs were used for analysis. (B–H) Echocardiographic assessment under full anesthesia, including LV mass, cardiac output (CO), ejection fraction (EF%), LVPW diastole/systole (LVPW d/s), and IVS diastole/systole (IVS d/s). Data shown are pooled from 3 independent experimental cohorts (each symbol represents individual experimental animals; missing data points were due to technical reasons) and are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis: one-way ANOVA.

Echocardiographic assessment of cardiac muscle dimensions and function included measurements of the left ventricular (LV) mass (Figure 6B), cardiac output (CO; Figure 6C), ejection fraction (EF) percentage (Figure 6D), diastolic and systolic LV posterior wall thickness (LVPW d and s; Figures 6E and 6F), and diastolic and systolic interventricular septal thickness (IVS d and s; Figures 6G and 6H). Mice in the vIGF2-GAA cohort showed a significant improvement and positive trend in LVPW s and d thickness compared to untreated Gaa−/− littermates, respectively (LVPW d p = 0.02 and LVPW s p = 0.09) and an almost complete recovery compared to WT mice; although a positive trend toward improvement in Gaa−/− in the WT-GAA cohort was observed, statistical significance was not reached (Figures 6E and 6F). Increased LVPW thickness in untreated Gaa−/− mice is indicative of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which was significantly improved in animals in the vIGF2-GAA cohort and only minimally improved in mice in the WT-GAA cohort. No significant difference was observed among all groups for the other cardiac parameters, indicating only a mild cardiac phenotype in PD mice at 4.5–5 months of age. A more pronounced cardiac insufficiency was observed in previous studies using the same mouse model at 7–8 months of age.17

In summary, this study indicates that transplantation of HSCs transduced with a vIGF2-GAA therapeutic transgene prevents the development of motor function decline and early cardiac functional abnormality in the murine model of PD. Moreover, amelioration of the observed cardiac functional parameters by HSC-GT correlated with histopathological and biochemical confirmation of correction of cardiac tissue glycogen levels by vIGF2-GAA (Figure 4A; Table S4).

Engineered vIGF2-GAA delivers normalization of the clinically relevant urine biomarker Glc4

Urinary glucose tetrasaccharide (Glc4) levels correlate with systemic glycogen levels in LSDs and are a validated, non-invasive biomarker of clinical efficacy in patients with PD receiving ERT.31 We therefore also analyzed urinary Glc4 levels in our study. Gaa−/− mice showed significantly elevated Glc4 levels compared to WT mice (p < 0.0001) at 4–5 months of age (Figure 7). Mice in the vIGF2-GAA gene therapy cohort maintained low urinary Glc4 levels, indistinguishable from those detected in WT mice (p > 0.8), while no significant difference was observed between untreated Gaa−/− mice and mice in the WT-GAA cohort (Figure 7). These data are consistent with the reduction in glycogen accumulation in muscles, heart, and CNS and the amelioration of functional phenotypes and demonstrate the superior efficacy of HSC-GT using the engineered vIGF2-GAA enzyme compared to the WT-GAA enzyme in preventing disease progression in PD mice.Figure 7 Correction of urine biomarker glucose tetrasaccharide

Glucose tetrasaccharide (Glc4) was measured in urine collected from individual animals across all treatment groups 3 months post-transplantation and normalized to creatinine levels. Data shown are pooled from 3 independent experimental cohorts (each symbol represents individual experimental animals) and are presented as mean ± SD; statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA where indicated.

Discussion

Enzyme replacement therapies provide substantial benefits to patients with PD by slowing disease progression and relieving symptoms, but they cannot fully correct disease manifestations, particularly in the IOPD forms.32,33 In recent years, attempts to develop a gene therapy for PD by AAV delivery of a GAA expression cassette to the liver or muscle tissue have encountered significant hurdles, essentially due to dose-limiting toxicity, insufficient correction of GAA deficiency in critical organs, and immune responses to both AAV capsid and GAA.9,11 In particular, liver-directed AAV gene therapy could not overcome the key limitations of ERT, including insufficient uptake of circulating GAA by muscle and heart tissues and the inability to cross the blood-brain barrier. Our study demonstrates that HSC-GT, coupled with the use of an engineered vIGF2-GAA fusion protein, achieves potentially therapeutic clearance of glycogen accumulation in critical organs by improving enzyme uptake compared to WT-GAA and biodistribution compared to AAV gene therapy. In particular, the brain-repopulating, microglia-like HSC cell progeny played a crucial role in providing a steady local source of enzyme to cross-correct GAA-deficient neurons.15,16

Previous studies have shown the efficacy of targeting the IGF2R for M6P-independent delivery of GAA through ERT or gene therapy.5,21,27,34 The fusion of glycosylation-independent lysosomal targeting (GILT) tags to β-glucuronidase and GAA resulted in markedly improved cellular uptake and storage reduction in murine models of MPS-VII and PD.21,27 However, safety concerns slowed the clinical development of ERT based on a GILT-GAA protein (BMN 701), as >60% of patients treated in a phase 3 trial (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01924845) developed hypoglycemia presumably due to off-target binding to the INSR.27 We attempted to improve the GILT approach by rational design of a vIGF2 tag that improves GAA trafficking to the lysosome and simultaneously reduces off-target binding to other IGF-binding receptors. The native IGF2 peptide has high affinity for IGF2R (CI-MPR) and IGF1R35 and lower affinity for the INSR. Tyrosine 27 is a critical residue for IGF1 and INSR binding: site-directed mutagenesis to leucine completely abolishes binding to IGF1R and INSR while maintaining high affinity for IGF2R.23 Similarly, mutation of the N-terminal glutamic acid 6 residue to arginine reduces affinity for serum IGF-binding proteins by >100-fold.22 We show that vIGF2-GAA, carrying those mutations, does not bind to IGF1 and INSRs while maintaining high affinity for IGF2R in an M6P-independent fashion. In addition, replacement of the native GAA secretion with the ER-chaperone signal peptide BiP enhanced the secretion of IGF2-GAA compared to WT-GAA. The secreted vIGF2-GAA enzyme showed improved binding and uptake kinetics in both a CI-MPR plate-binding assay and in Gaa−/− L6 myoblasts in culture. Adding M6P to the culture medium surprisingly increased enzyme uptake, presumably by inhibiting competitive binding of other M6P-containing lysosomal enzymes. The use of primary human CD34+ HSPCs in this study confirmed the enhanced secretion capacity of vIGF2-GAA and excluded any potential toxicity caused by constitutive protein expression. While an in vivo biodistribution study using primary transduced human CD34+ HSPCs has not been performed, a previous study17 has demonstrated the efficient transplantation of LV-transduced human CD34+ expressing WT-GAA into immunodeficient NSG mice. Together, these observations support the safety and clinical translational potential of this therapeutic approach for PD.

Previous studies have shown that HSC-GT using a GILT-GAA enzyme achieves substantial reductions of glycogen levels across skeletal muscle, heart, and brain tissues and ameliorates the PD phenotype in the murine disease model.17,19,20 Importantly, PD mice treated with HSC-GT develop central immune tolerance to rhGAA, preventing the development of neutralizing anti-rhGAA antibodies.36 HSC-GT could therefore prevent immune responses to engineered forms of GAA in a clinical setting; combined with the use of immune tolerance-inducing drugs, it could also benefit CRIM− patients developing anti-GAA neutralizing antibodies in response to ERT.37 The tolerizing role of HSC-GT to pre-existing humoral immunity has indeed been demonstrated in a clinical trial of HSC-GT for MPS-I.38

High-level expression of vIGF2-GAA from LV-transduced HSC progeny is essential to achieve therapeutic levels of circulating and CNS enzymes. In earlier studies, this was achieved by using a GAA expression cassette under the transcriptional control of the myeloproliferative sarcoma virus-derived (myeloproliferative sarcoma virus enhancer, negative control region deleted, dl587rev primer-binding site substituted promoter) MND promoter.5 Strong viral promoters, especially those with enhancer elements, however, carry a substantial risk of insertional oncogenesis even in an LVV context,39,40,41 which recently materialized in patients treated by HSC-GT for cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.42 In our study, the optimized vIGF2-GAA expression cassette is driven by the mammalian PGK promoter, which has a demonstrated long-term safety record in HSC-GT applications for MLD and MPS-I.13,38,43 The PGK promoter was sufficient to deliver therapeutic levels of vIGF2-GAA to muscles, heart, and CNS in the murine model of PD, making it an ideal candidate for the development of a clinical LVV.

A common pathological feature of LSDs is dysregulation of cellular autophagy, which in the context of PD results in reduction of CI-M6PR on cell membranes and further decrease of GAA uptake.44 The resulting, sustained accumulation of glycogen drives the pathology observed in patients with IOPD even under ERT, leading to muscle fiber deterioration, respiratory impairments, and severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.37 Our study showed a reduction in glycogen accumulation in the heart at levels comparable to those observed in WT mice, with minimal impact on heart functional parameters evaluated by echocardiography. Although Gaa−/− mice show only a mild cardiac phenotype at 5–6 months of age, the correction showed a positive trend that nicely correlated with the normalization of tissue glycogen levels. Previous studies evaluating 8-month-old Gaa−/− mice showed a more significant correction of functional cardiac parameters after HSC-GT.17,20 Together, these studies show that an engineered GAA delivered by the progeny of LV-transduced HSCs is efficacious in correcting the PD cardiac phenotype.

Glc4, a clinical biomarker of PD,45 is a product of glycogen metabolism that accumulates as a result of GAA deficiency31 and is used as a non-invasive, robust surrogate readout of tissue glycogen storage.46 Glc4 has proven useful in assessing disease severity and treatment response in both patients with IOPD and patients with LOPD.45,47 In this study, delivery of vIGF2-GAA restored Glc4 levels to normal levels in Gaa−/− mice, indicating the systemic therapeutic efficacy of HSC-GT using the engineered enzyme.

As previously mentioned, delivery of GAA to the CNS by ERT is limited by the blood-brain barrier.48 Restoration of GAA activity in the brain is, however, an important therapeutic goal for IOPD, where disease progression is clinically characterized by cognitive decline.49 While ERT provides significant benefit by extending patient survival, it is unable to prevent neurodegeneration, neuronal inflammation, and abnormal cognitive development.50,51 The murine PD model recapitulates some aspects of this progression, with significant immune inflammation and neurodegeneration at 6 months of age.5 In our study, delivery of vIGF2-GAA by HSC-GT resulted in a very significant correction of glycogen accumulation in the CNS as early as 3 months after transplantation, as shown by both biochemical and histological assessment of brain structures. Remarkably, restoration of less than 5% of normal GAA activity by vIGF2-GAA was sufficient to achieve almost 90% reduction of glycogen accumulation in the CNS. Cross-correction of glycogen accumulation in CNS tissue is achieved through the activity of microglial-like transduced HSC progeny repopulating the brain after microglial depletion induced by busulfan myeloablative conditioning.16,52 The unique ability of HSC-GT in correcting the CNS manifestations of LSDs has been validated by early- and late-stage clinical trials for MLD, MPS-I, and MPS-IIIA53,54,55 and by the commercial approval of Libmeldy and Lenmeldy (atidarsagene autotemcel) for gene therapy of MLD in the EU and US, respectively.56,57 The present study indicates that a similar therapeutic benefit could be achieved in the brain of patients with IOPD by HSC-GT with the vIGF2-GAA recombinant enzyme.

In summary, we show that HSC-GT using an LVV that combines the use of a PGK promoter with that of vIGF2-GAA enzyme achieves biochemical, histological, and phenotypic correction in a murine model of PD. Therapeutic efficacy is achieved by systemic and local delivery of a rationally designed recombinant enzyme with superior uptake and lysosomal targeting by an optimized, M6P-independent IGF2R tag. These results support the rationale for clinical development of HSC-GT with vIGF2-GAA for the severe forms of PD, where there is a high unmet clinical need.

Materials and methods

Kinetic binding of vIGF2 to receptors

Kinetic binding of WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA to bovine IGF2/soluble CI-MPR (sCI-MPR), human INSR, and human IGF1R was assessed by BLI as previously described, with minor modifications. Briefly, IGF2/sCI-MPR, InsR, and IGF1R were diluted in 10 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.0) at 17–43 nM depending on the receptor and immobilized on AR2G biosensors using EDC (1-Ethyl-3-[3-dimethylaminopropyl] carbodiimide hydrochloride) and s-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide) chemistry. After activation and coupling, biosensors were equilibrated in HEPES binding buffer (pH 6.5) to establish a baseline. A 2-fold serial dilution of WT or vIGF2-tagged enzymes was prepared (six concentrations, pH 6.5), and association was measured over 300 s followed by dissociation in ligand-free buffer for 300 s. Association and dissociation rate constants (kon and koff) and derived parameters were calculated using standard kinetic models. In this assay, the sCI-MPR of bovine origin was used to facilitate high-yield capture from serum. A comparative binding affinity of GAA to human and bovine CI-MPRs (80% homology to human CI-MPR) was confirmed in binding assays (Figure S4) to evaluate species-specific binding differences, indicating that no differences were anticipated between murine and human GAA binding, which have a comparable degree of species homology, confirming previously published results.58 The use of free M6P in the BLI assay was confirmed to completely abolish binding of WT-GAA through the M6P pathway at doses of 1 and 5 mM M6P (Figure S5).

In vitro GAA and vIGF2-GAA activity

CHO cells were transiently transfected with GAA or vIGF2-GAA, and enzymatic activity in conditioned medium was measured using 4-methylumbelliferyl-α-D-glucoside (4-MU-Glc) as previously reported. In brief, 25 μL of 1 mM 4-MU-Glc in 100 mM sodium acetate (pH 4.8) was incubated with 25 μL of neat or appropriately diluted samples at 37°C for 1 h, and reactions were stopped with 1.0 M glycine (pH 10.5). Fluorescence (excitation [Ex] 370 nm/emission [Em] 460 nm) was read on a SpectraMax M2 plate reader, and activities (nmol 4-MU-Glc/mL/h) were interpolated from a 4-MU-Glc standard curve using SoftMax Pro software.

sCI-MPR binding of GAA and vIGF2-GAA

Binding of GAA and vIGF2GAA in conditioned medium to sCI-MPR was evaluated by a plate-based binding assay. High-binding plates were coated with 6 μg/mL sCI-MPR, and samples (normalized to 1 μg/mL GAA based on activity) were added in a nine-point dilution series with or without 5 mM M6P. After 1 h of binding, 4-MU-Glc substrate in sodium acetate (pH 4.8) was added for 1 h at 37°C, and fluorescence was measured as above. Data (nmol 4-MU/mL/h) were plotted in GraphPad Prism 6, and KD and Bmax values were obtained by nonlinear regression.

Cell uptake and processing of GAA

Proteolytic processing of GAA was assessed in GAA knockout L6 myoblasts. Cells (2 × 105 per well in 6-well plates or 5 × 105 per 10 cm dish) were seeded in DMEM (15% FBS, L-glutamine, 4.5 g/L glucose, and 110 mg/L sodium pyruvate) and incubated overnight at 37°C, 5% CO2. The growth medium was replaced with conditioned media derived from transfected CHO cells expressing either WT-GAA or vIGF2-GAA for 16–18 h. After uptake, cells were washed with DPBS, returned to the growth medium for 24 h, then harvested, pelleted (500 × g, 10 min, 4°C), and lysed in 0.1 M sodium acetate, 0.1% Triton X-100, and HALT protease inhibitor (pH 5.6). Supernatants were used for protein quantification, western blotting, GAA activity, and glycogen kinetic assays.

Western blotting

Total protein was extracted in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (13,000 × g), and protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay. Equal protein was loaded for all assays and, where the JESS platform was used, visualized on gels. Aliquots containing 20 μg protein were mixed with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (4×), boiled for 5 min at 90°C, and resolved on NuPAGE 4%–12% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes, blocked with 5% milk in PBST or 5% BSA in TBST, and probed overnight at 4°C with rabbit monoclonal anti-human GAA (1:1,000). After washing, membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:1,000) for 1 h at room temperature, developed with ECL substrate, and imaged using a ChemiDoc system.

Glycogen kinetics

Steady-state glycogen kinetics of purified enzymes and lysates from uptake assays were evaluated to determine KM and Vmax. Briefly, 3.15 nM enzyme or lysate was incubated with glycogen (2.5–100 mg/mL) for 90 min at 37°C. Reactions were terminated by heating at 95°C for 10 min and cooling on ice. Lysates were normalized either to unprocessed GAA activity (4-MU assay as above) or total protein (BCA). After centrifugation (3,000 × g, 5 min), supernatants were applied to an anion-exchange column to quantify ionized glucose released from glycogen.

Transgene assembly, LVV production, and VCN assessment

The WT hGAA cDNA was synthesized (IDT) and cloned into pCCL-cppt-PGK to generate pCCL-cppt-PGK-WT_GAA-WPRESIN. The BiP.vIGF2-GAA transgene (codon optimized, Amicus Therapeutics) was cloned into the same LV backbone. LVVs were produced in HEK293T cells by transient transfection as previously described59 and titrated by TaqMan qPCR targeting WPRE and β-actin. VCN in transduced K562 cells was determined by qPCR using the same targets.

Cell culture

K562 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). C2C12 myoblasts were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% P/S and differentiated into myofibers by switching to DMEM with 5% horse serum and 1% P/S at high density. HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% P/S at 37°C, 5% CO2.

Secretion and uptake of WT-GAA and vIGF2-GAA in vitro

K562 cells were transduced with LVVs at MOI 10 and, 24 h later, reseeded in RPMI with 10% FBS and 1% P/S for 5 days before assessment of secreted rhGAA in culture medium by western blot. For transwell coculture, 2 × 105 Gaa−/− C2C12 cells were seeded on Matrigel-coated 24-well plates and differentiated to myofibers. Differentiated cells were switched to DMEM with 5% horse serum and 1% P/S, and 6.5 mm transwells (0.4 μm pore polyester membrane) containing transduced K562 cells in DMEM with 5% horse serum and 1% P/S were added for 24–72 h. In some experiments, 5 mM M6P was added as a competitive M6P receptor antagonist. Myofibers were then washed, detached, pelleted, and stored at −80°C for subsequent analysis.

Starvation assay

Gaa−/− C2C12 cells (2 × 105 per transwell) were differentiated as above and then switched to glucose- and pyruvate-free DMEM containing 10% dialyzed FBS and 1% P/S for 24 h to deplete intracellular glucose. The medium was replaced with glucose- and pyruvate-free DMEM containing 10% dialyzed FBS, 1% P/S, and 5 mM M6P, and 1 × 106 K562 cells (≥95% viability) expressing different GAA constructs were added in the upper transwell chamber. Of note, no differences in the proliferation of transduced K562 cells were observed previously or within the transwell-plated cells when transduced with the various GAA-expressing LVVs in vitro. Coculture was maintained for 48 h, after which C2C12 cells were washed, detached, pelleted, and frozen at −80°C for glycogen analysis.

GAA enzymatic activity and glycogen detection

Cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitors), incubated on ice for 10 min, and clarified by centrifugation. Animal tissues were homogenized in DPBS with 1% Triton X-100 and 2% protease inhibitors using a Precellys tissue homogenizer. GAA activity was measured using 4-MU-α-D-glucopyranoside in McIlvaine buffer (pH 3.8) at 37°C for 1 h, with reactions stopped by glycine buffer (pH 10.4). Fluorescence (Ex 360 nm/Em 460 nm) was measured on an OPTIMA plate reader and activities expressed as nmol 4-MU/h/mg protein (BCA normalized). Glycogen content was determined using a commercial fluorometric glycogen detection kit and normalized to protein content (μg glycogen/mg protein).

Source cells and experimental design

Cryopreserved healthy donor CD34+ HSPCs obtained from mobilized blood were thawed, washed, counted, and assigned to mock-transduced control items or LVV-transduced test items generated at the indicated MOIs (MOI 75). Cell viability and viable cell concentration were assessed before and after prestimulation, and cells were then allocated to colony-forming unit (CFU) assays, myeloid differentiation cultures, monocyte/macrophage (MMC) differentiation cultures, droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) for VCNs, and flow cytometric phenotyping.

CD34+ HSPC prestimulation and LV transduction

On day 0, thawed CD34+ HSPCs were resuspended at 1 × 106 cells/mL in prestimulation medium. The source document reports complete HSPC Brew (Miltenyi) supplemented with 2% v/v human serum albumin (HSA; Octapharma) and cytokines from Miltenyi including stem cell factor (SCF; 300 U/mL), Flt3 ligand (FLT3; 270 U/mL), thrombopoietin (TPO; 1,600 U/mL), and interleukin-3 (IL-3; 120 U/mL). Cells were prestimulated for 22 ± 2 h at 37°C and subsequently transduced at 1 × 106 cells/mL in prestimulation medium in the presence of the transduction enhancer LentiBOOST (1 mg/mL), followed by spinoculation at 400 × g for 2 h at 32°C and incubation for 14 ± 1 h at 37°C.

CFU assay

To assess clonogenic potential and transduction efficiency, 250 cells per condition were seeded in duplicate in MethoCult medium on SmartDish plates according to the manufacturer’s instructions (STEMCELL Technologies). After 14 ± 2 days, colonies were counted and classified using the STEMvision instrument (STEMCELL Technologies, London, UK), and single colonies were harvested for downstream genomic DNA extraction and VCN analysis. Single colonies were harvested directly into Lucigen QuickExtract (Biosearch Technologies) DNA extraction solution.

Myeloid liquid culture

For myeloid differentiation, cells were cultured from day 1 post-transduction in Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium (IMDM) supplemented with PS (100 U/mL and 100 μg/mL), 20% v/v FBS, SCF (300 ng/mL), IL-3 (60 ng/mL), and IL-6 (60 ng/mL). A total of 5 × 104 cells were resuspended in 2 mL myeloid differentiation medium and plated in 6-well dishes, with twice-weekly half-medium exchanges for 14 days. On day 14, supernatants were collected for protein and enzyme activity analyses, and cells were harvested for VCN determination and flow cytometric analysis.

MMC differentiation culture

For monocyte differentiation, cells were cultured from day 1 post-transduction in IMDM supplemented with PS (100 U/mL and 100 μg/mL), 20% v/v FBS, SCF (60 ng/mL), FLT3 (30 ng/mL), IL-3 (30 ng/mL), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; 80 ng/mL), IL-6 (10 ng/mL), and granulocyte-CSF (GM-CSF; 20 ng/mL). Cells were then transferred on day 7 to macrophage differentiation medium consisting of RPMI with glutamine (300 mg/mL), M-CSF (50 ng/mL), PS (100 U/mL and 100 μg/mL), and 10% v/v FBS. Briefly, 1 × 105 cells were plated in 2 mL medium in low-attachment 6-well dishes, fresh medium was added twice weekly, and cells and supernatants were harvested on day 14 for downstream assays.

Human genomic DNA extraction and ddPCR-based VCN analysis

Genomic DNA from cultured cells was isolated using QuickExtract DNA Extraction Solution (Biosearch Technologies) or the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN), following the manufacturers’ instructions. VCN was quantified by ddPCR using ddPCR Supermix for Probes (no dUTP; Bio-Rad Laboratories) and a primer/probe set targeting the HIV Psi packaging signal of the LVV, together with a human RNaseP (RPPH1) reference assay for normalization. Droplets were analyzed on a QX200 ddPCR Droplet Reader, and data were processed using QX Manager or QX One software (Bio-Rad Laboratories), with VCN calculated using the diploid copy-number variation protocol as 2× (HIV Psi copies/μL divided by RNaseP copies/μL). The ddPCR assay for LV detection used the following oligonucleotides: HIV Psi forward primer, 5′-TGAAAGCGAAAGGGAAACCA-3′; HIV Psi reverse primer, 5′-GCCGTGCGCGCTTCAG-3′; and HIV Psi probe, 5′-FAM/AGCTCTCTCGACGCAGGACTCGGC/IOWA Black-3′. The reference assay was a commercially available TaqMan RNaseP assay from Thermo Fisher Scientific (assay ID Hs04930436_g1; VIC-MGB_PL).

Human cell flow cytometric analysis

Myeloid-differentiated cells (5–10 × 104 cells per sample) were stained with Live/Dead Fixable Dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific), anti-human CD11b-BV786 (clone D12; BD Biosciences), anti-human CD45-PerCP-Cy5.5 (clone 2D1; BioLegend), and anti-human CD14-APC-Cy7 (clone M5E2; BioLegend). Data acquisition was performed on an Attune flow cytometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and analyses were conducted using FlowJo v.10 (BD Biosciences). The gating strategy included forward-scatter and side-scatter selection, doublet exclusion, dead-cell exclusion based on viability dye staining, identification of CD34+ cells, and subsequent assessment of CD14 and CD11b expression using isotype controls as a reference for quadrant placement.

Experimental animals

Gaa−/− mice (B6;129Gaatm1Rabn/J, Jackson Laboratory) were bred and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions at the Biological Services Unit, University College London. All experimental work with mice was reviewed and approved by the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body at University College London, and in compliance with Home Office Regulations. Animals were housed in individually ventilated cages with ad libitum food and water and were used at 6–7 weeks of age. NutraGel was provided for 2 weeks after transplantation. For terminal procedures, mice were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane and perfused intracardially with PBS; tissues were harvested, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. All procedures were conducted under approved institutional and national ethical guidelines.60

Lin− purification, LV transduction, and transplantation

Whole BM was collected from 6- to 7-week-old Gaa−/− males by flushing long bones with cold PBS. Lineage negative (Lin−) HSPCs were enriched using the Direct Lineage Cell Depletion kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lin− cells were cultured at 1 × 106/mL in serum-free expansion medium supplemented with murine SCF (100 ng/mL), murine Flt3 ligand (100 ng/mL), human TPO (25 ng/mL), 2% FBS, and 1% P/S for 2 h at 37°C, 5% CO2. Cells were then transduced for 22–24 h with LV.PGK.BiP.vIGF2coGAA or LV.PGK.WTGAA at MOI 150, washed, counted, and resuspended (5 × 105–1×106 cells in 200 μL PBS) for intravenous transplantation into preconditioned Gaa−/− recipients.

Rotarod assessment of motor function

Motor performance was evaluated 3 months post-transplant using an accelerating rotarod (4–40 rpm) (47600, Ugo Basile). Mice were habituated for 3 min at 4 rpm, followed by five accelerating trials with 5 min rest between runs. Latency to fall from each trial was recorded and analyzed in GraphPad Prism.

Glc4 in urine

Urine was collected 3 months post-transplant, diluted 1:10 in ddH20, and analyzed for Glc4 by high-performance liquid chromatography in the Chemical Pathology Laboratory at Great Ormond Street Hospital as previously described.61

Assessment of cardiac function by ultrasound

Cardiac structure and function were assessed by transthoracic echocardiography using a Vevo 2100 system with an MS550D transducer. Mice were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane in oxygen and chest hair removed before imaging. M-mode, B-mode, and Doppler imaging were used to measure ventricular wall thickness, chamber dimensions, CO, stroke volume, EF, diastolic function, and aortic velocities.

Histopathology

Following PBS perfusion under terminal anesthesia (ketamine/xylazine), the diaphragm, gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, heart, and brain were collected, snap frozen for biochemical analysis, or fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, paraffin embedded, and sectioned at 4 μm for histology. PAS, D-PAS (not shown), and H&E staining were performed by an external histopathology service (Propath, Hereford, UK), and PAS staining scores were assessed in a blinded manner.

Ex vivo splenocytes immunophenotyping

Spleens were placed in a sterile Petri dish and mechanically dissociated through a 100 μm cell strainer fitted onto a 50 mL conical tube using the plunger of a 1 mL syringe, with PBS added during dissociation and repeated 5 mL washes to maximize cell recovery and prevent drying. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 × g for 10 min, resuspended in 2 mL RBC Lysis Buffer (Gibco), and incubated for 2 min at room temperature. Lysis was stopped with 25 mL cold PBS, the suspension was filtered again through a 100 μm strainer to remove debris, centrifuged immediately at 300 × g for 10 min, and the final cell pellet was used for fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) staining.

Flow cytometric phenotyping

For murine splenocyte immunophenotyping, approximately 1 × 105 cells were stained with anti-mouse CD11b-PE (clone M1/70; BioLegend), Gr-1-FITC (clone RB6-8C5; BioLegend), B220-APC (clone RA3-6B2; BioLegend), and CD3-FITC (clone 17A2; BioLegend). Data acquisition was performed on an Attune flow cytometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and analyses were conducted using FlowJo v.10 (BD Biosciences). The gating strategy included forward-scatter and side-scatter selection, doublet exclusion, dead-cell exclusion where applicable, and immunophenotypic assessment of the relevant marker-positive populations.

Hematological analysis of blood samples

Terminal bleed samples were collected into EDTA-coated capillary Microvette tubes (Sarstedt) and processed by the Great Ormond Street pathology laboratory. Hematological analysis was performed using an Atellica HEMA 570 analyzer (Siemens Healthineers), and major blood parameters were measured from 30 μL of undiluted blood.

Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism v.8. Multiple groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA, with p values indicated in the figures.

Data and code availability

Primary datasets from these studies are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.

Acknowledgments

This study was sponsored by Orchard Therapeutics (Europe) Limited and conducted at UCL and Amicus Therapeutics. This work was also supported by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, the UCL Confidence in Concept Fund, and the UCL Technology Fund. The authors would like to acknowledge the expert support in echocardiography analysis by Daniel Stuckey at the UCL Department of Cardiovascular Imaging.

Author contributions

S.W., S.T., S.B., and N.M. conducted the experiments; S.W., H.B.G., T.B.J., and J.M.W. designed the experiments; S.W., J.J.B., A.B.G., P.S., F.M., and H.B.G. wrote the paper.

Declaration of interests

S.W., A.B.G., C.R., P.H., F.M., P.S., and H.B.G. are employees of Orchard Therapeutics, a Kyowa Kirin company. S.T., N.M., J.J.B., H.D., T.B.J., and J.M.W. are employees of and hold stock in Amicus Therapeutics. S.B. and H.B.G. are employees of UCL. H.B.G. is a founder of Orchard Therapeutics (Europe) Limited. J.M.W. is an employee of Sanford Research. F.M. is a member of the editorial board for Molecular Therapy. Amicus Therapeutics holds IP related to the vIGF2 tag in the manuscript (patent IDs US20240091321A1 and WO2021072372A1).

Supplemental information

Document S1. Figures S1–S5 and Tables S1–S3

Table S4. Percentage reduction in glycogen levels detected in organs of gene therapy-treated Gaa−/− mice relative to untreated Gaa−/− mice

Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omta.2026.201824.


References

1 Taverna S. Cammarata G. Colomba P. Sciarrino S. Zizzo C. Francofonte D. Zora M. Scalia S. Brando C. Curto A.L. Pompe disease: pathogenesis, molecular genetics and diagnosis Aging (Albany NY) 12 2020 15856 15874 10.18632/aging.103794 32745073 PMC7467391
2 Dogan Y. Barese C.N. Schindler J.W. Yoon J.K. Unnisa Z. Guda S. Jacobs M.E. Oborski C. Maiwald T. Clarke D.L. Screening chimeric GAA variants in preclinical study results in hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy candidate vectors for Pompe disease Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 27 2022 464 487 10.1016/j.omtm.2022.10.017 36419467 PMC9676529
3 Lim J.A. Li L. Raben N. Pompe disease: from pathophysiology to therapy and back again Front. Aging Neurosci. 6 2014 177 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00177 25183957 PMC4135233
4 Zhu Y. Jiang J.L. Gumlaw N.K. Zhang J. Bercury S.D. Ziegler R.J. Lee K. Kudo M. Canfield W.M. Edmunds T. Glycoengineered acid alpha-glucosidase with improved efficacy at correcting the metabolic aberrations and motor function deficits in a mouse model of Pompe disease Mol. Ther. 17 2009 954 963 10.1038/mt.2009.37 19277015 PMC2835178
5 Liang Q. Catalano F. Vlaar E.C. Pijnenburg J.M. Stok M. van Helsdingen Y. Vulto A.G. van der Ploeg A.T. van Til N.P. Pijnappel W.W.M.P. IGF2-tagging of GAA promotes full correction of murine Pompe disease at a clinically relevant dosage of lentiviral gene therapy Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 27 2022 109 130 10.1016/j.omtm.2022.09.010 36284764 PMC9573825
6 Byrne B.J. Geberhiwot T. Barshop B.A. Barohn R. Hughes D. Bratkovic D. Desnuelle C. Laforet P. Mengel E. Roberts M. A study on the safety and efficacy of reveglucosidase alfa in patients with late-onset Pompe disease Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 12 2017 144 10.1186/s13023-017-0693-2 28838325 PMC5571484
7 Banugaria S.G. Prater S.N. Ng Y.K. Kobori J.A. Finkel R.S. Ladda R.L. Chen Y.T. Rosenberg A.S. Kishnani P.S. The impact of antibodies on clinical outcomes in diseases treated with therapeutic protein: lessons learned from infantile Pompe disease Genet. Med. 13 2011 729 736 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182174703 21637107 PMC3954622
8 McIntosh P.T. Hobson-Webb L.D. Kazi Z.B. Prater S.N. Banugaria S.G. Austin S. Wang R. Enterline D.S. Frush D.P. Kishnani P.S. Neuroimaging findings in infantile Pompe patients treated with enzyme replacement therapy Mol. Genet. Metabol. 123 2018 85 91 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.10.005 PMC5808895 29050825
9 Mingozzi F. High K.A. Immune responses to AAV vectors: overcoming barriers to successful gene therapy Blood 122 2013 23 36 10.1182/blood-2013-01-306647 23596044 PMC3701904
10 Colella P. Mingozzi F. Gene Therapy for Pompe Disease: The Time is now Hum. Gene Ther. 30 2019 1245 1262 10.1089/hum.2019.109 31298581
11 Colella P. Sellier P. Costa Verdera H. Puzzo F. van Wittenberghe L. Guerchet N. Daniele N. Gjata B. Marmier S. Charles S. AAV Gene Transfer with Tandem Promoter Design Prevents Anti-transgene Immunity and Provides Persistent Efficacy in Neonate Pompe Mice Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 12 2019 85 101 10.1016/j.omtm.2018.11.002 30581888 PMC6299151
12 Saleh A.H. Rothe M. Barber D.L. McKillop W.M. Fraser G. Morel C.F. Schambach A. Auray-Blais C. West M.L. Khan A. Persistent hematopoietic polyclonality after lentivirus-mediated gene therapy for Fabry disease Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 28 2023 262 271 10.1016/j.omtm.2023.01.003 36816757 PMC9932294
13 Fumagalli F. Calbi V. Natali Sora M.G. Sessa M. Baldoli C. Rancoita P.M.V. Ciotti F. Sarzana M. Fraschini M. Zambon A.A. Lentiviral haematopoietic stem-cell gene therapy for early-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy: long-term results from a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1/2 trial and expanded access Lancet 399 2022 372 383 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1 35065785 PMC8795071
14 Visigalli I. Delai S. Politi L.S. Di Domenico C. Cerri F. Mrak E. D'Isa R. Ungaro D. Stok M. Sanvito F. Gene therapy augments the efficacy of hematopoietic cell transplantation and fully corrects mucopolysaccharidosis type I phenotype in the mouse model Blood 116 2010 5130 5139 10.1182/blood-2010-04-278234 20847202 PMC3709639
15 Biffi A. Hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy to halt neurodegeneration Neurotherapeutics 21 2024 e00440 10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00440 PMC11417237 39276677
16 Capotondo A. Milazzo R. Politi L.S. Quattrini A. Palini A. Plati T. Merella S. Nonis A. di Serio C. Montini E. Brain conditioning is instrumental for successful microglia reconstitution following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109 2012 15018 15023 10.1073/pnas.1205858109 22923692 PMC3443128
17 Piras G. Montiel-Equihua C. Chan Y.K.A. Wantuch S. Stuckey D. Burke D. Prunty H. Phadke R. Chambers D. Partida-Gaytan A. Lentiviral Hematopoietic Stem Cell Gene Therapy Rescues Clinical Phenotypes in a Murine Model of Pompe Disease Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 18 2020 558 570 10.1016/j.omtm.2020.07.001 32775491 PMC7396971
18 Yoon J.K. Schindler J.W. Loperfido M. Baricordi C. DeAndrade M.P. Jacobs M.E. Treleaven C. Plasschaert R.N. Yan A. Barese C.N. Preclinical lentiviral hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy corrects Pompe disease-related muscle and neurological manifestations Mol. Ther. 32 2024 3847 3864 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.09.024 39295144 PMC11573599
19 Stok M. de Boer H. Huston M.W. Jacobs E.H. Roovers O. Visser T.P. Jahr H. Duncker D.J. van Deel E.D. Reuser A.J.J. Lentiviral Hematopoietic Stem Cell Gene Therapy Corrects Murine Pompe Disease Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 17 2020 1014 1025 10.1016/j.omtm.2020.04.023 32462050 PMC7240064
20 van Til N.P. Stok M. Aerts Kaya F.S.F. de Waard M.C. Farahbakhshian E. Visser T.P. Kroos M.A. Jacobs E.H. Willart M.A. van der Wegen P. Lentiviral gene therapy of murine hematopoietic stem cells ameliorates the Pompe disease phenotype Blood 115 2010 5329 5337 10.1182/blood-2009-11-252874 20385789
21 LeBowitz J.H. Grubb J.H. Maga J.A. Schmiel D.H. Vogler C. Sly W.S. Glycosylation-independent targeting enhances enzyme delivery to lysosomes and decreases storage in mucopolysaccharidosis type VII mice Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 2004 3083 3088 10.1073/pnas.0308728100 14976248 PMC365748
22 Francis G.L. Aplin S.E. Milner S.J. McNeil K.A. Ballard F.J. Wallace J.C. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-II binding to IGF-binding proteins and IGF receptors is modified by deletion of the N-terminal hexapeptide or substitution of arginine for glutamate-6 in IGF-II Biochem. J. 293 1993 713 719 10.1042/bj2930713 7688957 PMC1134424
23 Sakano K. Enjoh T. Numata F. Fujiwara H. Marumoto Y. Higashihashi N. Sato Y. Perdue J.F. Fujita-Yamaguchi Y. The design, expression, and characterization of human insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) mutants specific for either the IGF-II/cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor or IGF-I receptor J. Biol. Chem. 266 1991 20626 20635 1657932
24 Gething M.J. Role and regulation of the ER chaperone BiP Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 10 1999 465 472 10.1006/scdb.1999.0318 10597629
25 Selvan N. Mehta N. Venkateswaran S. Brignol N. Graziano M. Sheikh M.O. McAnany Y. Hung F. Madrid M. Krampetz R. Endolysosomal N-glycan processing is critical to attain the most active form of the enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase J. Biol. Chem. 296 2021 100769 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100769 PMC8191302 33971197
26 Zufferey R. Dull T. Mandel R.J. Bukovsky A. Quiroz D. Naldini L. Trono D. Self-inactivating lentivirus vector for safe and efficient in vivo gene delivery J. Virol. 72 1998 9873 9880 10.1128/JVI.72.12.9873-9880.1998 9811723 PMC110499
27 Maga J.A. Zhou J. Kambampati R. Peng S. Wang X. Bohnsack R.N. Thomm A. Golata S. Tom P. Dahms N.M. Glycosylation-independent lysosomal targeting of acid alpha-glucosidase enhances muscle glycogen clearance in pompe mice J. Biol. Chem. 288 2013 1428 1438 10.1074/jbc.M112.438663 23188827 PMC3548456
28 Fusco A.F. McCall A.L. Dhindsa J.S. Zheng L. Bailey A. Kahn A.F. ElMallah M.K. The Respiratory Phenotype of Pompe Disease Mouse Models Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 2020 2256 10.3390/ijms21062256 PMC7139647 32214050
29 Poletti V. Biffi A. Gene-Based Approaches to Inherited Neurometabolic Diseases Hum. Gene Ther. 30 2019 1222 1235 10.1089/hum.2019.190 31397176
30 Consiglieri G. Tucci F. Bernardo M.E. Hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy of neurometabolic lysosomal storage diseases Brain Dev. 47 2025 104384 10.1016/j.braindev.2025.104384 PMC12290290 40570504
31 Heiner-Fokkema M.R. van der Krogt J. de Boer F. Fokkert-Wilts M.J. Maatman R.G.H.J. Hoogeveen I.J. Derks T.G.J. The multiple faces of urinary glucose tetrasaccharide as biomarker for patients with hepatic glycogen storage diseases Genet. Med. 22 2020 1915 1916 10.1038/s41436-020-0878-2 32655139 PMC7605430
32 George K.A. Anding A.L. van der Flier A. Tomassy G.S. Berger K.I. Zhang T.Y. Sardi S.P. Pompe disease: Unmet needs and emerging therapies Mol. Genet. Metabol. 143 2024 108590 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108590 39418752
33 Stevens D. Milani-Nejad S. Mozaffar T. Pompe Disease: a Clinical, Diagnostic, and Therapeutic Overview Curr. Treat. Options Neurol. 24 2022 573 588 10.1007/s11940-022-00736-1 36969713 PMC10035871
34 Doyle B.M. Turner S.M.F. Sunshine M.D. Doerfler P.A. Poirier A.E. Vaught L.A. Jorgensen M.L. Falk D.J. Byrne B.J. Fuller D.D. AAV Gene Therapy Utilizing Glycosylation-Independent Lysosomal Targeting Tagged GAA in the Hypoglossal Motor System of Pompe Mice Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 15 2019 194 203 10.1016/j.omtm.2019.08.009 31660421 PMC6807287
35 Casella S.J. Han V.K. D'Ercole A.J. Svoboda M.E. Van Wyk J.J. Insulin-like growth factor II binding to the type I somatomedin receptor. Evidence for two high affinity binding sites J. Biol. Chem. 261 1986 9268 9273 10.1016/s0021-9258(18)67649-5 3013881
36 Douillard-Guilloux G. Richard E. Batista L. Caillaud C. Partial phenotypic correction and immune tolerance induction to enzyme replacement therapy after hematopoietic stem cell gene transfer of alpha-glucosidase in Pompe disease J. Gene Med. 11 2009 279 287 10.1002/jgm.1305 19263466
37 Tardieu M. Cudejko C. Cano A. Hoebeke C. Bernoux D. Goetz V. Pichard S. Brassier A. Schiff M. Feillet F. Long-term follow-up of 64 children with classical infantile-onset Pompe disease since 2004: A French real-life observational study Eur. J. Neurol. 30 2023 2828 2837 10.1111/ene.15894 37235686
38 Gentner B. Tucci F. Galimberti S. Fumagalli F. De Pellegrin M. Silvani P. Camesasca C. Pontesilli S. Darin S. Ciotti F. Hematopoietic Stem- and Progenitor-Cell Gene Therapy for Hurler Syndrome N. Engl. J. Med. 385 2021 1929 1940 10.1056/NEJMoa2106596 34788506
39 Gilioli G. Lankester A.C. de Kivit S. Staal F.J.T. Ott de Bruin L.M. Gene therapy strategies for RAG1 deficiency: Challenges and breakthroughs Immunol. Lett. 270 2024 106931 10.1016/j.imlet.2024.106931 39303994
40 Robert-Richard E. Richard E. Malik P. Ged C. de Verneuil H. Moreau-Gaudry F. Murine retroviral but not human cellular promoters induce in vivo erythroid-specific deregulation that can be partially prevented by insulators Mol. Ther. 15 2007 173 182 10.1038/sj.mt.6300030 17164789
41 Zhou S. Fatima S. Ma Z. Wang Y.D. Lu T. Janke L.J. Du Y. Sorrentino B.P. Evaluating the Safety of Retroviral Vectors Based on Insertional Oncogene Activation and Blocked Differentiation in Cultured Thymocytes Mol. Ther. 24 2016 1090 1099 10.1038/mt.2016.55 26957223 PMC4923324
42 Duncan C.N. Bledsoe J.R. Grzywacz B. Beckman A. Bonner M. Eichler F.S. Kühl J.S. Harris M.H. Slauson S. Colvin R.A. Hematologic Cancer after Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy N. Engl. J. Med. 391 2024 1287 1301 10.1056/NEJMoa2405541 39383458 PMC11846662
43 Horgan C. Watts K. Ram D. Rust S. Hutton R. Jones S. Wynn R. A retrospective cohort study of Libmeldy (atidarsagene autotemcel) for MLD: What we have accomplished and what opportunities lie ahead JIMD Rep. 64 2023 346 352 10.1002/jmd2.12378 37701322 PMC10494509
44 Fukuda T. Ahearn M. Roberts A. Mattaliano R.J. Zaal K. Ralston E. Plotz P.H. Raben N. Autophagy and mistargeting of therapeutic enzyme in skeletal muscle in Pompe disease Mol. Ther. 14 2006 831 839 10.1016/j.ymthe.2006.08.009 17008131 PMC2693339
45 An Y. Young S.P. Kishnani P.S. Millington D.S. Amalfitano A. Corz D. Chen Y.T. Glucose tetrasaccharide as a biomarker for monitoring the therapeutic response to enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe disease Mol. Genet. Metabol. 85 2005 247 254 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.03.010 15886040
46 Dasouki M. Jawdat O. Almadhoun O. Pasnoor M. McVey A.L. Abuzinadah A. Herbelin L. Barohn R.J. Dimachkie M.M. Pompe disease: literature review and case series Neurol. Clin. 32 2014 751 776 10.1016/j.ncl.2014.04.010 25037089 PMC4311397
47 Fiege L. Duran I. Marquardt T. Improved Enzyme Replacement Therapy with Cipaglucosidase Alfa/Miglustat in Infantile Pompe Disease Pharmaceuticals 16 2023 1199 10.3390/ph16091199 PMC10537092 37765007
48 Wu D. Chen Q. Chen X. Han F. Chen Z. Wang Y. The blood-brain barrier: structure, regulation, and drug delivery Signal Transduct. Targeted Ther. 8 2023 217 10.1038/s41392-023-01481-w PMC10212980 37231000
49 Ebbink B.J. Poelman E. Plug I. Lequin M.H. van Doorn P.A. Aarsen F.K. van der Ploeg A.T. van den Hout J.M.P. Cognitive decline in classic infantile Pompe disease: An underacknowledged challenge Neurology 86 2016 1260 1261 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002523 26944269
50 Bosch M.E. Kielian T. Neuroinflammatory paradigms in lysosomal storage diseases Front. Neurosci. 9 2015 417 10.3389/fnins.2015.00417 26578874 PMC4627351
51 van den Dorpel J.J.A. Mackenbach M.J. Dremmen M.H.G. van der Vlugt W.M.C. Rizopoulos D. van Doorn P.A. van der Ploeg A.T. Muetzel R. van der Beek N.A.M.E. van den Hout J.M.P. Long term survival in patients with classic infantile Pompe disease reveals a spectrum with progressive brain abnormalities and changes in cognitive functioning J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 47 2024 716 730 10.1002/jimd.12736 38584574
52 Hoogerbrugge P.M. Suzuki K. Suzuki K. Poorthuis B.J. Kobayashi T. Wagemaker G. van Bekkum D.W. Donor-derived cells in the central nervous system of twitcher mice after bone marrow transplantation Science 239 1988 1035 1038 10.1126/science.3278379 3278379
53 Aldenhoven M. Jones S.A. Bonney D. Borrill R.E. Coussons M. Mercer J. Bierings M.B. Versluys B. van Hasselt P.M. Wijburg F.A. Hematopoietic cell transplantation for mucopolysaccharidosis patients is safe and effective: results after implementation of international guidelines Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant. 21 2015 1106 1109 10.1016/j.bbmt.2015.02.011 25708213
54 Garcia-Perez L. van Roon L. Schilham M.W. Lankester A.C. Pike-Overzet K. Staal F.J.T. Combining Mobilizing Agents with Busulfan to Reduce Chemotherapy-Based Conditioning for Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Cells 10 2021 1077 10.3390/cells10051077 PMC8147230 33946560
55 Wood S.R. Bigger B.W. Delivering gene therapy for mucopolysaccharide diseases Front. Mol. Biosci. 9 2022 965089 10.3389/fmolb.2022.965089 PMC9511407 36172050
56 EMA. Available from: https://efim.org/node/147752.
57 FDA. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-gene-therapy-children-metachromatic-leukodystrophy.
58 Bohnsack R.N. Misra S.K. Liu J. Ishihara-Aoki M. Pereckas M. Aoki K. Ren G. Sharp J.S. Dahms N.M. Lysosomal enzyme binding to the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor is regulated allosterically by insulin-like growth factor 2 Sci. Rep. 14 2024 26875 10.1038/s41598-024-75300-9 PMC11541866 39505925
59 Merten O.W. Hebben M. Bovolenta C. Production of lentiviral vectors Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 3 2016 16017 10.1038/mtm.2016.17 PMC4830361 27110581
60 ASPA. Available from: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/14/contents.
61 Manwaring V. Prunty H. Bainbridge K. Burke D. Finnegan N. Franses R. Lam A. Vellodi A. Heales S. Urine analysis of glucose tetrasaccharide by HPLC; a useful marker for the investigation of patients with Pompe and other glycogen storage diseases J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 35 2012 311 316 10.1007/s10545-011-9360-2 21687968
