
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Epileptic Disord
Journal ID: Epileptic Disord
NLM Journal ID: 100891853
Journal ID: EPD2

Epileptic Disorders

ISSN: 1294-9361
EISSN: 1950-6945

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13499271
PMID: 42172078
DOI: 10.1002/epd2.70272
Article ID: EPD270272
Article ID: 4435196
Article version: 1
Subjects: Seminar in Epileptology, Seminar in Epileptology

Holistic management of epilepsy in adults with intellectual development disorders

Fonseca et al.

Fonseca Elena https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3895-1237 1 2
Riva Antonella https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9152-5571 3 4
López‐Maza Samuel https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3660-2604 1 2
Zaddach Malin https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7584-0811 5
Porter Marie‐Claire https://orcid.org/0009-0000-1727-7901 6
Borggraefe Ingo https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8484-5945 7
Watkins Lance https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0447-5906 8 9 10
Schulze‐Bonhage Andreas https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2382-0506 11
Shankar Rohit https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1183-6933 10
Striano Pasquale https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6065-1476 3 4 strianop@gmail.com

Nashef Lina https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3446-5987 12
1 Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neurology Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus Barcelona Spain
2 Research Group on Status Epilepticus and Acute Seizures, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus Barcelona Spain
3 Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DINOGMI) University of Genoa Genoa Italy
4 IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Full Member of ERN EpiCARE Genoa Italy
5 Division of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics Dr. Von Hauner Children's Hospital, University Hospital, Ludwig‐Maximilians‐University Munich Germany
6 The Royal London Hospital, Barts NHS Trust London UK
7 Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, MUC iSPZ Hauner – Munich University Center for Children with Medical and Developmental Complexity, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital Munich Germany
8 Unit for Development in Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities University of South Wales Pontypridd UK
9 Swansea Bay University Health Board, Mental Health and Learning Disability Delivery Unit, Llwyneryr Unit Swansea UK
10 Cornwall Intellectual Disability Equitable Research (CIDER), Peninsula School of Medicine, University of Plymouth Plymouth UK
11 Epilepsy Center, University Medical Center‐University of Freiburg Freiburg Germany
12 Department of Neurology King's College Hospital London UK
* Correspondence
Pasquale Striano, Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DINOGMI), University of Genoa; IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Via Gerolamo Gaslini 5, 16147 Genoa, Italy.
Email: strianop@gmail.com

Electronic publication date: 2026 May 22
Print publication date: 2026 Aug
Volume: 28
Issue: 4
First page: 981
Last page: 1006
Revised 2026 Apr 1; Received 2025 Oct 21; Accepted 2026 Apr 29
Copyright: © 2026 The Author(s). Epileptic Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International League Against Epilepsy.
License: This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Keywords: adults, comorbidities, epilepsy, IDD, intellectual development disorders, multidisciplinary care, therapeutic aims
Figure count: 2
Table count: 2
Page count: 26

source-schema-version-number: 2.0
cover-date: August 2026
details-of-publishers-convertor: Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.8.6 mode:remove_FC converted:22.08.2026

==============================
Abstract

This seminar addresses the complexity of the management of epilepsy in adults with intellectual development disorders (IDD), advocating holistic and multidisciplinary care aligned with the learning objectives of the International League Against Epilepsy. Epilepsy is significantly more prevalent in people with IDD, presenting unique diagnostic, therapeutic, and psychosocial challenges. Accurate diagnosis is hampered by limitations in communication, necessitating reliance on caregivers' observations. In adults with IDD and epilepsy, utilization of diagnostic tools, e.g., video electroencephalograph (EEG) monitoring, is helpful but can be challenging. Management requires careful consideration of cognitive and behavioral comorbidities and the effects of antiseizure medications (ASMs) on cognitive function and quality of life (QoL). Personalized treatment plans should balance seizure control against ASM side effects, prioritizing therapeutic goals aligned with individual patient needs. Effective multidisciplinary care involves primary care physicians, neurologists, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, therapists, and specialized nursing staff. Transition periods, including from pediatric to adult care, and from the family home to professional care, represent critical phases requiring structured planning and collaboration among health and social‐care providers, patients, and caregivers. Current gaps in integrated care include the need for targeted therapeutic approaches, more tailored cognitive and behavioral assessment tools, guidelines for managing pregnancy and hormonal considerations, management of commonly associated comorbidities, including non‐epileptic paroxysmal events, and reduction of preventable morbidity and mortality, including sudden death. This seminar emphasizes the necessity of addressing these gaps to advance care standards, promote research, and ultimately improve patient outcomes. The manuscript includes two anonymized illustrative clinical case studies. Practical recommendations include systematic reassessment of underlying etiologies, including genetic counseling and testing, reviewing the electroclinical diagnosis, careful selection and titration of ASMs to minimize cognitive and behavioral impacts, and structured transition. Addressing these challenges and implementing an integrated care model could significantly enhance QoL for adults living with IDD and epilepsy.

Key points

Multidisciplinary collaboration is key to optimizing epilepsy care in adults with intellectual development disorders (IDD), particularly in the presence of comorbidities.

Treatment plans should be individualized, carefully balancing seizure control with potential adverse effects of medications.

Well‐structured transition pathways from pediatric to adult care are crucial to ensure continuity and prevent gaps in care.

Sleep disturbances are common in individuals with IDD and epilepsy, with a bidirectional effect, and must be routinely assessed, as they can significantly impact seizure control.

Cognitive function in people with IDD and epilepsy requires adapted assessment tools, while behavioral issues demand integrated, targeted interventions.

Women with IDD and epilepsy face unique challenges during pregnancy and motherhood, underscoring the need for specific clinical guidance.

Targeted research and tailored clinical guidelines are urgently needed to address unmet needs in cognitive evaluation, sleep management, reproductive health, and management of behaviors that challenge in this population.

ILAE Curriculum Learning Objectives

6.1.4 Demonstrate the ability to recognize and manage the special needs of persons with epilepsy and intellectual development disorders Re‐investigate if the underlying etiology is unknown and review electroclinical diagnosis, as this may influence management

Recognize the difficulty in understanding the basis underlying episodic events and confirm their nature with EEG video recording as needed

Manage frequent comorbidities in a multidisciplinary service

Anticipate the need for transition and facilitate this at different stages in life

Manage rescue treatment in the community to reduce excess morbidity and mortality, and minimize disruption for the individual and family

6.1.5 Manage cognitive changes in epilepsy and the cognitive effects of AEDs Individualize treatment aims and choices: agree on therapeutic aims in relation to seizure control, safety, and quality of life

Consider where better control of ongoing epileptic activity, including sleep‐related, in epileptic encephalopathy (EE)/ developmental EE (DEE) may improve cognition and function

Minimize total drug load to reduce the negative impact on cognition of antiseizure medications.

1 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Epilepsy is a common neurological disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1% and an annual incidence of approximately 50 new cases per 100 000 in high‐income countries. 1 Intellectual development disorders (IDD) affect approximately 1.55% of the global population with a range of 1%–3%. 2 , 3 The terminology “intellectual development disorders” is based on the 2022 updated International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (World Health Organization; ICD‐11), with IDD replacing the ICD‐10 terms “mental retardation” and “intellectual disability”. This has been implemented by the American Psychiatric Association via the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM‐5 criteria), which also replaces “mental retardation”.

In accordance with the DSM‐5 criteria, IDD must include deficits in both intellectual and adaptive functioning, crucially with the onset of disability during the developmental period. The severity of IDD can range from ‘mild’ to ‘profound’, requiring complete dependence on caregivers (Table 1). Epilepsy in individuals with IDD typically has an earlier onset, shows higher rates of treatment resistance, and is frequently accompanied by multiple comorbidities. Its prevalence is higher than in the general population, with a pooled estimate of 22.2% (95% confidence interval [CI] 19.6–25.0) 1 across all levels of IDD, and a clear correlation between epilepsy prevalence and the severity of IDD. For those with mild IDD, who constitute the majority, the epilepsy prevalence is ~10%, compared with ~15% with moderate IDD, ~30% with severe IDD, and ~50% with profound IDD. 1 Comorbidities, including motor, speech, behavioral, cognitive, psychiatric, and sleep‐related issues, as well as systemic comorbidities, including gastrointestinal disorders, are common in patients with IDD and epilepsy, and may develop over time. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 Comorbidities may be linked to specific developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs), which have their own needs at different stages, such as gait disturbance in adults with Dravet syndrome. 9 Comorbidities may also be linked to the long‐term use of antiseizure medications (ASMs). 5 Around 70% of people with IDD and epilepsy are considered to be pharmacoresistant, requiring multiple ASMs 10 with an increased side‐effect burden and risk of sudden death in epilepsy (SUDEP) compared with those without IDD, 11 and reliance on multiple aspects of local healthcare systems throughout their lives.

TABLE 1 Definitions of severity categories for IDD.

Severity category	DSM‐5 criteria (severity classified on the basis of daily skills) 4	AAIDD criteria (severity classified on the basis of intensity of support needed) 4	
Mild	Able to live independently with minimum levels of support.

(Previous DSM‐IV IQ range: 50–69)*

	Intermittent support needed during transitions or periods of uncertainty	
Moderate	Independent living may be achieved with moderate levels of support, such as those available in group homes.

(Previous DSM‐IV IQ range: 36–49)*

	Limited support needed in daily situations	
Severe	Requires daily assistance with self‐care activities and safety supervision.

(Previous DSM‐IV IQ range: 20–35)*

	Extensive support needed for daily activities	
Profound	Requires 24‐h care.

(Previous DSM‐IV IQ range: <20)*

	Pervasive support needed for every aspect of daily routines	
Note: Adapted from Committee to Evaluate the Supplemental Security Income Disability Program for Children with Mental Disorders, 2015.

Abbreviations: AAIDD, American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities; DEE, developmental and epileptic encephalopathy; DSM‐5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition; IDD, intellectual development disorders; IQ, intellectual quotient.

* DSM‐IV severity categories based on IQ scores only.

Among holistic considerations for the management and care provision of adults with IDD and epilepsy (Figure 1), there are established areas of need that require improvement. 12 , 13 While multidisciplinary care is integral to pediatric management, this is not always the case for adults with IDD and epilepsy, where care may be disjointed. There is variability in the care provided and a lack of internationally accepted standards, as well as challenges in engagement. 14 , 15 This seminar manuscript was developed following a workshop of epileptologists. It draws on themes discussed during the workshop and incorporates findings from an independent, targeted, non‐systematic literature review on epilepsy in adults with IDD, with a focus on holistic management in this population. This seminar addresses diagnosis, misdiagnosis, and treatment of epilepsy, and highlights comorbidities (Figure 2). It focuses on the ability to recognize and manage the needs of adults with IDD and epilepsy, including DEEs, as well as address optimal broader management of epilepsy, including the often‐overlooked cognitive effects of ASMs, both learning objectives in the ILAE curriculum. 16 Challenges in management, gaps in knowledge, and disparities in care are also considered. While the seminar adopts a holistic perspective, its primary focus remains on clinical management in relation to epilepsy, with broader medical management and determinants of well‐being acknowledged but not explored in detail.

FIGURE 1 Holistic considerations for the management of adults with intellectual development disorders and epilepsy.

FIGURE 2 Considerations in the clinical journey of an adult patient with intellectual development disorders and epilepsy. ASM, antiseizure medication; EEG, electroencephalograph; QoL, quality of life.

2 METHODOLOGY

This seminar manuscript originated following a dedicated multinational workshop of epileptologists, organized by Jazz Pharmaceuticals in May 2024, which focused on clinical, diagnostic, and organizational challenges in providing holistic care for adults with DEE, and more broadly IDD and epilepsy. Following the workshop, and independent from it, the authors decided to co‐author a seminar manuscript on the subject of holistic management of epilepsy in adults with IDD, informed by the experience of the participants, the materials discussed at the meeting, and an independent, targeted, non‐systematic literature review. Literature searches focused on adults with epilepsy and IDD, and included epidemiology, diagnostic pathways, comorbidities, service provision, and therapeutic strategies. The aim was to provide a clinically grounded and educational synthesis rather than a systematic or exhaustive review. The manuscript also includes two anonymized illustrative clinical case studies (see Appendix A). Informed consent was obtained for both cases from parents or legally authorized representatives.

3 CHALLENGES IN SERVICE PROVISION

There is global variation in the availability and quality of healthcare for people with epilepsy in general, with no comparative studies. Higher‐income countries have more specialized clinics and services. However, significant challenges exist due to a lack of joined‐up care. 17 Studies from Australia and the UK show higher rates of hospital readmissions and emergency department visits for seizures, aspiration pneumonia, falls, injuries, and constipation in people with IDD with epilepsy compared with those without IDD with epilepsy, often because of challenges in managing comorbid conditions. 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 Admission due to seizures was the most common cause in the general population of patients with epilepsy. 19 However, the presence of multiple comorbidities, including respiratory difficulties, motor impairment, and neuropsychiatric diagnoses, further increases the risk of admission in people with IDD and epilepsy. 23 , 24 , 25 An online qualitative international survey, conducted by the International Bureau of Epilepsy, highlighted the negative and pervasive burden, both caregiving and financial, faced by 48 families supporting a family member with IDD and epilepsy. 26 Moreover, social‐care costs are reported to exceed healthcare costs in this population, particularly among those with severe IDD and those with refractory seizures. 27

Significant challenges are recognized at patient, clinical, and service level with variation in service availability, resources, training, and delivery. 14 Based on some of the authors' experiences of neurology/epilepsy clinics in hospitals in the UK, varying expertise, limited capacity, appointments scheduled too early or late in the day, crowded waiting rooms, delays in being seen, small clinic rooms, and insufficient time, against a background of high staff turnover including among carers, all conspire against good care. Moreover, where people with IDD and epilepsy require admission to acute hospitals, facilities can be suboptimal, often with insufficient reasonable adjustments made, although a legal requirement. For example, carers may not be able to stay overnight when needed. Whilst facilities for medium‐term admissions in specialized units are scarce, in the UK, as in many other countries, the management of people with IDD and epilepsy is often in secondary or tertiary care. Outpatient clinics may be held in hospitals away from community‐based psychiatric/intellectual disabilities services, hampering the ability to provide joined‐up care. 13 , 14 , 17 , 28 In lower‐income settings, access to diagnostic tools and treatments is limited. 29 Stigma and cultural beliefs regarding seizures and IDD may also limit care and perpetuate inequalities, 30 , 31 while close family support may enhance safety and quality of life (QoL). 32 , 33

3.1 Transition

Transition of care occurs at more than one stage in the life of those with IDD and epilepsy. Pediatric to adult transition of medical care is widely discussed as a time when continuity of care can be disrupted, risking deterioration in seizure control and higher hospitalization rates. 34 , 35 Transition requires early planning, overcoming communication barriers, and ensuring continuity of care. There are ongoing difficulties related to the successful realization of this transition, 36 , 37 such as late planning, lack of provider expertise, and difficulties in addressing the needs of individuals with IDDs in adult care. 36 , 38 , 39 Pediatric to adult transition clinics exist, but there is variability in the availability of this service for those with epilepsy, with and without a diagnosis of IDD. 39 , 40 Addressing these barriers through structured programs would enhance continuity of care and is more likely to guarantee continuous, consistent communication between pediatric and adult services. Transition also occurs at other stages. For some, whether at home or in residential care/supported living, their condition may progress such that their needs are no longer met by their care setting. For others, living at home with their parents, transition again looms as parents age. Parents can be left to navigate this alone, battling social services with no roadmap or formal process of anticipation and support, nor guidance or standards to follow. More work is needed to define standards of care in this regard to facilitate transition for the individual concerned. 41

3.2 Determinants of quality of care

Clinicians are increasingly aware of the need to address QoL for people with epilepsy in everyday clinical practice in different patient groups and clinical trials and post‐surgery. 42 Available outcome measures, however, may be limited to evaluate QoL in people with IDD. 43 There is a need to define QoL priorities for adults with IDD and epilepsy across different patient groups. 43 The extensive Quality of Life in Epilepsy Inventory (QOLIE‐31), for example, is reportedly superior to the EuroQoL 5‐dimension, 3‐levels (EQ‐5D‐3L) in evaluating QoL in severely affected patients with epilepsy. 44 Seizure freedom and minimal side effects of ASMs are considered important determinants of QoL in epilepsy in general 44 ; however, in drug‐resistant epilepsy, other measures can also be important. In recent years, clinical vignettes have been used to assess QoL determinants. 45 Other measures considered include predictability and seizure‐free days. 46

3.3 Capacity and decision‐making

The legal framework for medical decision‐making in people with IDD varies in different countries. People with IDD need to be empowered to participate as fully as possible in any decision affecting them. Article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities establishes that people with disabilities have the right to legal capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects of life. This framework calls for supported decision‐making to replace substituted decision‐making and for the person's preferences to be considered first with the necessary support provided. 47 In clinical practice, capacity should be assessed in relation to the specific decision under consideration, recognizing that many individuals may be able to express preferences when information is presented in an accessible format and when communication is facilitated by caregivers or familiar professionals. 48 National regulations on consent and safeguarding guide clinicians in determining when proxy or legally appointed representatives must be involved.

Beyond the legal dimension, social determinants play a substantial role in shaping access to care and health outcomes. 49 , 50 Limitations in education, employment, autonomy, and community resources can influence engagement with services, continuity of follow‐up, and adherence to treatment plans. Stigma and reduced social participation may further compound these barriers. 51 Awareness of these contextual factors helps clinicians tailor recommendations that are realistic and sustainable, ensuring that medical decisions are not made in isolation from the person's lived environment and support network.

3.4 Accidental injury, bone health, and excess mortality (including SUDEP)

Reported accidental injury rates in people with IDD and epilepsy vary. Reduced opportunities to engage in daily activities 34 may lower the risk in people with more severe disabilities, while accidents resulting from daily activities (e.g., cooking) are common in people with epilepsy and those with milder IDD. 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 Contributing factors include the impact of ASMs and reduced mobility. 56 The incidence of both osteoporosis and bone fractures is high in people with IDD and epilepsy. In a study of institutionalized adults with IDD and epilepsy, 40% had at least one clinical fracture during 7 years of follow‐up. 57 Assessing and optimizing bone health is essential in this patient group and is not routinely addressed.

A systematic review of 16 studies found that epilepsy in people with IDD was associated with increased mortality compared with the general population. 58 In one study from the UK, the risk of death in people with IDD and epilepsy was 3.2 times greater than the general population for men (95% CI: 2.7–3.8) and 5.6 times greater for women (95% CI: 4.6–6.7). 59 In another study, the risk of death was 16.8 times greater (95% CI: 10.7–26.5) for those having more than weekly seizures versus those having less than weekly seizures. 60 Studies also report an increased overall risk of SUDEP in people with IDD compared with those without 11 and with specific underlying genetic conditions. 61 Several large cohorts, including register‐based data sets, have shown that comorbid epilepsy and IDD significantly raise mortality risk, often due to refractory seizures, impaired mobility, aspiration risk, and issues with coordination of care. 52 , 62 , 63 A UK‐based study of mortality in IDD concluded that pervasive health inequalities and missed prevention opportunities may be a factor in the earlier epilepsy‐related mortality observed in IDD. 64 National and international guidelines stress the importance of SUDEP communication at the earliest opportunity. There remains clinician‐mediated bias on when and with whom SUDEP discussions should take place. 65 , 66 The SUDEP and Seizure Safety Checklist 67 consists of known modifiable and non‐modifiable risk factors associated with SUDEP and other harm, for use in a structured risk assessment and person‐centered discussion, 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 leading to a personalized risk profile. It has been shown to influence behavioral change, thereby reducing modifiable risk factors, with the most impact in those considered at highest risk. 72 , 73 Documentation of SUDEP discussion and periodic reassessment is needed.

4 EPILEPSY MANAGEMENT IN PEOPLE WITH IDD

The clinical management of epilepsy in people with IDD is hampered by many factors that can have an impact on care, including diagnostic challenges, difficulties with monitoring events, symptoms, and comorbidities, as well as assessment of ASM adverse effects and drug–drug interactions. These factors may be negatively impacted by communication barriers 74 and by the framework of care provision needed to support those with combined IDD and epilepsy, involving patients, families, legal guardians, and professional caregivers. Communication barriers may arise from a combination of limited receptive and expressive language, reliance on carers to interpret information about symptoms, seizures, ASMs, and comorbid conditions, as well as issues with trust, credibility, and consistency of information provision. 74 These challenges can be addressed by appropriate education and counseling using accessible language and other delivery formats involving the family and carers. Caregiver‐frameworks underpinned by evidence relating to carer burden, care pathways, patient information needs, and shared decision‐making structures can be useful for overcoming communication barriers. 26 , 75

4.1 Diagnostic challenges

4.1.1 Etiological and electroclinical diagnosis

In people with IDD and epilepsy, regularly reconsidering the etiology and re‐investigating for an underlying diagnosis may be needed. 76 Genetic advances, in particular whole‐genome sequencing and microarrays, have greatly advanced the ability to identify the genetic cause in many cases, 77 which can have an impact on prognosis and choice of treatment, as well as inform about systemic associated comorbidities. There are many different underlying genetic etiologies in epilepsy in the context of IDD. These include mechanistic domains resulting in malformations of cortical development or alterations in synaptic function and metabolic transport pathways. 78 For example, SCN1A‐, STXBP1‐, and CDKL5‐related encephalopathies have all been associated with combined, severe, early‐onset epilepsy and IDD or developmental impairment. 79 , 80 , 81 Pathogenic variants of SCN1A are also the primary genetic cause of Dravet syndrome, a DEE associated with cognitive impairment. 82 Reaching an etiological (often genetic) diagnosis is increasingly important. Ongoing research may enable more personalized therapy effective against both cognition and seizures, with gene‐ or mechanism‐targeted new therapies (see Section 9). 83

Some adult patients with epilepsy and IDD, for example, may satisfy criteria for Lennox–Gastaut syndrome, but may not have had that diagnosis previously made, having been diagnosed with ‘symptomatic generalized epilepsy’ according to the 1989 ILAE criteria. 84 Reviewing early history, seizure types, historical and current awake and sleep electroencephalographies (EEGs), and any prolonged sleep recordings is necessary to clarify the electroclinical diagnosis, potentially leading to more treatment options.

4.1.2 Classifying and monitoring episodic events

A systematic review exploring the misdiagnosis of epilepsy in people with IDD reported that up to 38% of people with IDD were misdiagnosed, with misinterpretation of behavioral, physiological, syndrome‐related, medication‐related, or psychological events. 85 Understanding the basis for episodic events is essential for appropriate management. The diagnosis of epilepsy in general is based on expert assessment, including an accurate history from both the patient and a witness. People with IDD and epilepsy can find it challenging to report semiological elements of their seizures, including auras or postictal impairments, while information from observers may be compromised by a lack of consistency and misinterpreted observations. This poses difficulty in differentiating epileptic seizures from non‐epileptic events, including behavioral stereotypes or psychogenic events. There is a risk of misdiagnosis or diagnostic overshadowing by healthcare professionals, who may under‐ or overestimate the occurrence of epileptic seizures. Video EEG is often a prerequisite for classification of events to confirm if they are epileptic or not and reach an electroclinical syndromic diagnosis, essential to guide treatment. Video‐EEG monitoring was reported to change the classification of events in more than one third of patients with IDD and epilepsy (36.5%). 86 Inpatient monitoring may be difficult because of behavioral challenges. Home videos and the less disruptive prolonged home EEG video recordings, where available, can be very helpful. 87 , 88

Developing technologies may also prove helpful. 89 Subcutaneous EEG recordings, for example, can allow for almost continuous EEG recordings for months to years, though exploration of their potential use remains preliminary in individuals with IDD and epilepsy. 90 Wearable devices 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 and AI‐supported video surveillance systems 96 can provide additional information on seizure frequency, as well as severity, to guide treatment. By providing objective outcome measures, such devices may also facilitate the inclusion of people with IDD and epilepsy in clinical research for antiseizure treatments, where they are underrepresented. 90 , 97 , 98

4.1.3 Non‐epileptic paroxysmal events

There was no evidence in one study of diagnostic delay when differentiating psychogenic from epileptic seizures in people with mild IDD compared with those with normal cognition. 99 Studies report different rates of non‐epileptic paroxysmal events in people with IDD. 100 , 101 Such events in people with IDD present a significant challenge, with a growing recognition that they should not be approached through the same lens as functional or dissociative seizures. 100 , 101 Non‐epileptic paroxysmal events in individuals with IDD are likely to be of a complex, multifactorial nature linked to a range of additional neurological, developmental, and environmental factors. 101 A person, unable to express distress or discomfort in other ways, might exhibit seizure‐like behaviors in response to physical or emotional triggers. 101 In this context, these events require a comprehensive individualized approach to assessment and management. This should start with the recognition that people with IDD and epilepsy often have multiple causes for paroxysmal events and that labelling these events as epileptic seizures is common. 102 Assessment of potential non‐epileptic paroxysmal events should include a thorough systemic and neurological evaluation, assessment of sensory and communication needs, and consideration of the individual's psychological and environmental context. 103 Treatment should explore combining neurological and medical care, sensory modulation, communication strategies, and behavioral interventions in a multidisciplinary approach. 101

4.2 Antiseizure medications

Prescribing ASMs for people with IDD and epilepsy is hampered by limited evidence from clinical trials. A traffic light system was proposed in the UK in 2017, under the auspices of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, to guide ASM prescribing in this setting based on both the strength of evidence and utility. 104 Under this system, which has been updated and extended since its introduction, 105 , 106 existing ASMs are classified in three categories: ‘red’ (only to be used in exceptional circumstances), ‘amber’ (could be considered if benefits outweigh risks or as second‐line treatment), or ‘green’ (considered as first‐line treatment).

4.2.1 ASMs in IDD and behavioral challenges

People with IDD and epilepsy have higher levels of comorbidities compared with people without IDD. Comorbidities include physical, neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders, which can include autism spectrum disorder and attention‐deficit hyperactivity disorder. 5 , 6 , 24 , 34 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 110 Older adults (over 40 years) with IDD and epilepsy often exhibit further multi‐morbidities. 107 They experience polypharmacy, particularly with antipsychotics, which can negatively affect QoL. 111 In institutionalized or supported‐living settings, they may exhibit fewer seizures than younger individuals, likely due to more regimented medication administration. 107 , 111 In a systematic review, more severe epilepsy was associated with neuropsychiatric comorbidity, as was the presence of IDD when compared with the general population, adding to the complexity of managing epilepsy in these individuals. 112 One study described the frequency of challenging behaviors in adults with both IDD and epilepsy at a tertiary epilepsy center, with self‐injurious behavior presenting in 35% of subjects, stereotyped behavior in 60%, and aggressive/destructive behavior in 63%. 113 A systematic review and meta‐analysis looking at epilepsy and challenging behavior in adults with IDD reported contradictory findings. 114 There was no significant association between epilepsy and challenging behavior, but after sensitivity analysis of ten studies, a significantly higher rate of overall challenging behavior was found in the epilepsy group (effect size: 0.16) compared with the non‐epilepsy group. Aggression and self‐injurious behavior, but not stereotypy, both showed a significantly higher rate in the epilepsy group, with very small effect sizes (0.16 and 0.28, respectively). 114 Behaviors that challenge, defined as culturally abnormal behaviors of an intensity, frequency, or duration that jeopardize the safety of the individual or others, also remain a significant management issue in this setting. 115 Any worsening of behavior, which can be medication‐related but could have diverse causes, risks the individual's QoL, residential placement or daycare facility, and needs to be avoided and/or addressed early. A best practice checklist has been suggested to provide clinicians with a structured framework to consider causal explanations for behaviors that challenge in this population. 115 , 116 The checklist includes: biological (history taking, clinical examination, and physical investigations), mental health/psychological/psychiatric/behavioral, social and medication factors, all of which may help with their assessment and management of these behaviors. 115 The 2016 report of the Intellectual Disability Task Force of the Neuropsychiatric Commission of the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) proposed a range of research and clinical practice recommendations, including that any child or adult with IDD, epilepsy, and behavioral disorder should be provided with multidisciplinary care. 6 Behavioral problems may lead to choosing ASMs with sedating properties or to administering sedating medications, which carry inherent risks. 117

There are limited sufficiently powered studies to guide evidence‐based ASM prescribing in people with IDD and epilepsy. 110 , 118 People with IDD and epilepsy are often excluded from or at least underrepresented in clinical trials, partly due to complexities around consent and the heterogeneity in their cognitive and adaptive functioning. 98 , 119 In many countries, ethics committees require justification for the inclusion of people with IDD in clinical trials, the consequence of which is a lack of data for modern treatments and associated risks. 119 While recognizing ethical and practical considerations involved, the counterargument is that there needs to be good justification for excluding special groups from clinical trials, particularly for conditions which commonly affect them.

While some studies suggest responses to certain ASMs may be similar in those with and without IDD, 120 , 121 this has to be reconciled with a higher incidence of refractory epilepsy in the subgroup of people with IDD and DEE. 122 , 123 Furthermore, in DEEs, multiple seizure types are often present, necessitating an awareness of the efficacy of ASMs in different seizure types, as well as the potential for seizure exacerbation with narrow‐spectrum ASMs. 124 Barriers to adherence to treatment are not well studied in this group and deserve more focus. Moreover, tolerability and side effect profiles often demand more careful monitoring due to limitations in self‐reporting. Thus, beyond seizure control, treatment in those with IDD and epilepsy requires awareness of the often‐atypical manifestations of adverse treatment effects, including behavioral and cognitive effects, which are discussed further below.

4.2.2 ASMs and cognition

Cognitive impairment is associated with both underlying pathology, seizure load/epileptiform discharges, and ASM side effects. 125 , 126 Epilepsy specific parameters such as seizure frequency (and ongoing epileptic activity) may contribute more to cognitive impairment in epileptic encephalopathies. Epilepsy onset in such patients is often associated with developmental slowing/regression. This raises the question that ASM treatment might improve cognitive functioning. 127 Those with treatment‐resistant epilepsy, however, often receive ASM polytherapy without achieving seizure freedom in the majority. Yet polytherapy is associated with a higher risk of adverse effects on cognition. 128 Moreover, ASMs differ in their effect on cognition, with negative effects associated with treatment with phenobarbital, phenytoin, topiramate, and carbamazepine; whereas levetiracetam and lamotrigine have been considered to have the least impact on cognition. 129 , 130 , 131 A narrative review concluded that in DEEs, cannabidiol (CBD), fenfluramine, levetiracetam, brivaracetam, and lamotrigine may have positive effects on some aspects of cognition. 132

Cognitive improvement might be achieved after epilepsy surgery in a small proportion of suitable patients. 133 , 134 There is sparse evidence that treatment of EE with standard ASMs leads to significant cognitive improvement. 129 Regarding newer agents, CBD led to clinical improvement in selective attention and on a caregiver‐rated behavioral measure in a patient cohort of drug‐resistant epilepsy comprising both DEE and EE. 135 In patients with Dravet syndrome, fenfluramine improved executive function, also suggesting an effect beyond seizure reduction. 136 In DEE, emerging precision‐based treatments, discussed further below, aim to target the underlying defect, thus addressing the spectrum of disease‐specific symptoms comprising seizures, cognitive impairment, and other comorbidities. These approaches align with the concept of disease modification as not ‘only’ seizure control.

Treating clinicians need to consider the following to minimize cognitive and other side effects of ASMs: Discuss/define therapeutic aims for the individual concerned, namely reduction or freedom from disabling seizures, with the patient/caregivers. A range of possible therapeutic aims are discussed further in the next section.

Slowly titrate to the lowest effective dosage and choose the agent with the most favorable pharmaceutical profile for the individual. If the last incremental increases have had no added value, slowly titrate back to the previous effective dose.

Avoid, where possible, ASMs with known cognitive side effects.

Apply increased caution for those with a history of neuropsychiatric problems/mental illness and identify any emerging behavioral problems early. These may relate to speed of titration and dose as well as overall pharmacological load.

Wherever possible and considered safe to do so, within agreed therapeutic aims, reduce the total number of ASMs as well as total drug load.

4.3 Therapeutic aims in relation to seizure control in people with IDD

While seizure freedom/control in epilepsy is desirable, as discussed above, it should not be at the expense of unacceptable side effects from ASMs. Brief auras, mild brief focal seizures, or absences, if they do not carry a physical risk, may not affect QoL for some, and decisions about treatment need to consider the person's wishes, needs, activities, and circumstances. The clinician, patient, and carer need to consider together which therapeutic aims are appropriate and achievable with minimum side effects in each case, and how these, if achieved, would enhance safety, reduce morbidity and mortality (including SUDEP risk), and improve QoL for the individual as well as their carers. Various levels in connection with therapeutic aims in relation to seizure control, other than seizure freedom, include: Freedom from all but the most minor seizures without physical risk or postictal after effects.

Freedom from seizures with significant loss of awareness.

Reducing the need for 24‐h observation for ongoing seizures and the need for rescue medication for seizures.

Preventing all seizures with a risk of injury (those associated with falls, wandering, or other risk‐associated behavior).

Increasing seizure‐free days.

Preventing major disruption and risk associated with the need for emergency care (paramedics, A&E attendance, and/or admission) for status epilepticus or seizure clusters.

Preventing nocturnal convulsions, thus reducing the risk of SUDEP.

If control of more severe seizures cannot be achieved as outlined above, enhanced monitoring and seizure detection need to be considered to minimize risk and allow for prompt rescue treatment initially in the community. Practice clinical guidelines regarding seizure detection using wearable devices have been published by the ILAE. 89 Table 2 lists some available devices. At the time of writing, there were two wearable devices commercially available specifically designed for people with IDD and epilepsy: (1) Nightwatch, a photoplethysmographic heart rate module and accelerometer that has shown high sensitivity for major nocturnal seizures in adults and children with IDD and epilepsy living in residential care, 94 , 95 , 139 and (2) Nelli, an AI‐based automated detection system capturing audio and visual data (typically during sleep) that has been shown to capture seizures missed by carers of patients with IDD and epilepsy. 96 , 146 More devices are likely to become available in the future.

TABLE 2 Seizure detection devices that demonstrate positive future potential. 137 , 138

Device	Type	Description	
Nightwatch 94 , 95 , 139	Wearable	Photoplethysmographic heart rate module and accelerometer	
Epi‐Care 140 , 141	Wearable	Accelerometer for detecting GTC seizures	
Embrace 1&2 and now EpiMonitor (Empatica)	Wearable	Multimodal 142 —Accelerometer, gyroscope, photoplethysmography, electrodermal activity, and temperature	
Seizure Link	Wearable	Surface EMG 143	
UNEEG 144	Implant (unilateral subcutaneous)	Remote EEG, prolonged monitoring analysis aided by an AI algorithm	
Epiminder 145	Implant (bilateral subcutaneous)	Remote EEG, prolonged monitoring analysis aided by an AI algorithm	
Nelli 96 , 146	Non‐wearable	Automated detection system capturing audio and visual data (typically in sleep or at rest). AI‐based algorithm	
Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; EEG, electroencephalogram; EMG, electromyography; GTC, generalized tonic–clonic.

Most commonly, rescue treatment is with the use of benzodiazepines, along with individualized protocols, which must take into account the individual's seizure duration, frequency and pattern, as well as the caregiver's capabilities. 147 The choice between nasal or buccal midazolam or other options must consider factors such as availability, ease of administration, speed of action, and patient/carer preference to ensure timely and effective intervention during seizure emergencies. It is also important to consider how often the protocol would result in the use of rescue treatment and adjust this to avoid dependence and reduced efficacy. 147 Rescue treatment is generally not needed in adults with IDD where there is no history of prolonged seizures or seizure clusters. Furthermore, overuse/misuse of rescue medication can occur and needs to be avoided. 148 Best practice guidelines have been developed in the UK by the Epilepsy Specialist Nurses Association. 149 , 150 An individualized emergency management plan should include descriptions of seizures and seizure duration, or definition of seizure cluster requiring rescue treatment, drug to be administered, dose and route, as well as when to call emergency services. 151 It should be reviewed on a regular basis.

4.4 Epilepsy surgery and neuromodulation

Surgical and neuromodulatory treatments may represent valuable options for selected adults with IDD and epilepsy when conventional pharmacotherapy has proven insufficient. Where patients meet the ILAE definition of pharmacoresistant epilepsy, referral to a specialist or tertiary epilepsy center for comprehensive re‐evaluation is recommended, including formal consideration of epilepsy surgery and neuromodulation. 152 Procedures such as resective surgery or laser ablation in the presence of focal epileptogenic networks, disconnection procedures, vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), or responsive neurostimulation (RNS) can offer meaningful seizure reduction and, in some cases, improvements in alertness, behavior, and overall functioning. 153 , 154 , 155 Literature on surgical outcomes in patients with treatment‐resistant epilepsy and IDD is mixed in relation to whether IQ affects outcome. 62 , 156

Presurgical evaluation presents unique challenges in this population. 157 Behavioral difficulties, patient tolerance of scan duration, movement artifacts during imaging, limited cooperation with prolonged video‐EEG monitoring, intolerance of invasive diagnostic procedures, and difficulties in completing advanced neuropsychological assessment may restrict assessment, and thus eligibility for surgery. 157 Neuroimaging acquisition may require sedation/anesthesia, and diffuse and multifocal structural abnormalities may complicate localization and surgical planning. 157 , 158 Furthermore, assessing postoperative risks and predicting functional outcomes is more complex in individuals with baseline cognitive impairment. 157

Despite these barriers, early referral to a comprehensive epilepsy center is essential. Where definitive resective surgery is not possible, neuromodulatory approaches including VNS and other neuromodulatory approaches may offer clinically relevant benefits with a favorable risk profile. 28 , 154 , 157 VNS may have a positive effect on mood without negative cognitive effects associated with ASMs but currently carries some long‐term limitations regarding imaging and may exacerbate sleep apnea. Recommendations should be made within a multidisciplinary framework involving neurologists/neurophysiologists, neurosurgeons and neuropsychologists, with therapeutic options presented to caregivers and, whenever possible, the patient and supported by specialist nurses. 28 A realistic appraisal of expectations, caregiver capacity, and long‐term support is crucial to ensure that any intervention aligns with the individual's needs, safety, and QoL. 28

5 SLEEP DISORDERS

Sleep is a key factor in the QoL of patients with DEEs, 8 although studies are limited in adults with IDD and epilepsy in general, and further research is needed. There is a bidirectional relationship between epilepsy and sleep: nocturnal seizures disrupt sleep architecture, and a lack of sleep can aggravate seizure frequency. 159 , 160 In some DEEs, such as Dravet syndrome, sleep disorders are reported more frequently than in the general population and general epilepsy cohorts, 8 challenging seizure control and affecting the developmental outcome and QoL for patients and carers. Sleep disorders include insomnia, frequent arousals, sleep apnea, and daytime sleepiness, which can be aggravated by disrupted sleep due to frequent sleep‐related epileptiform discharges/epileptic seizures, 161 polypharmacy, and/or the underlying condition. Some ASMs, especially benzodiazepines, can cause respiratory depression, while others can alter sleep quality. 147 , 162 Psychiatric problems and environmental triggers can exacerbate sleep problems. In turn, disturbed sleep can affect presentation, behavior, and functioning in the days that follow. More research is needed.

6 GENDER, SEXUALITY, AND HORMONAL ASPECTS

The natural course of epilepsy may be different according to sex. 163 Indeed, pooled estimates have reported the prevalence of epilepsy as being slightly higher in males versus females (24.8% [95% CI: 19.6–30.8] versus 22.2% [17.3–28.1]), 1 whilst standardized mortality ratios have been reported to be higher in females than males (5.6 and 3.2, respectively), 59 reflecting the higher baseline mortality in the general population in males. Sexuality, in relation to sex education, sentimental relationships, and gender identification, is often forgotten in people with IDD 164 and, while there is overlap with the general population with epilepsy, specific studies on sexuality, gender, or hormonal aspects in IDD are lacking. In women with epilepsy in general, reproductive endocrine disorders include anovulatory menstrual cycles, oligomenorrhea, and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), the incidence of which is higher compared with the general population. 165 Furthermore, cyclic hormonal changes can have a significant impact on seizure control. Catamenial exacerbation of seizures is influenced by fluctuations in neurosteroid levels. 166 Progesterone, a natural anticonvulsant, can counteract the excitatory effects of glutamate, while estrogens exert proconvulsant properties. Managing menstruation may also be harder for individuals with IDD compared with those without. 167 Evidence relating to the effectiveness of different contraceptive strategies for individuals with epilepsy and IDD is scarce. A 2023 population‐based US Medicaid analysis of women with IDD found that they were less likely to receive intrauterine devices (IUDs) than women without and were more likely to receive injectable contraception. 168 Another study in the US reported that neurologists tend to recommend longer‐term methods (implants, IUDs, and injectable contraceptives) for women with epilepsy and IDD, 169 largely to reduce pregnancy risk given teratogenic ASMs (such as valproate) and adherence concerns. In both men and women in general, sexual dysfunction may be associated with ASMs, 170 which affect sex hormone levels and the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. Some ASMs, such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital, reduce sex steroid concentrations and alter the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, 170 contributing to fertility problems, and valproate has been associated with PCOS. 171 Valproate has also been reported with reduced fertility in animal studies, and there are case reports of reversible infertility in male patients, 170 , 172 although a recent large epidemiological study did not show a significant association of male infertility with valproate. 173 In people with IDD and epilepsy, the approach to sexuality and reproductive health needs to be individualized according to the cognitive and decision‐making abilities of these patients. A functional, decision‐specific capacity assessment, focusing on the person's ability to understand, use, and communicate information at a particular time, can be used to assess the patient's decision‐making capacity at each individual decision point in their treatment. 174

6.1 Pregnancy, IDD, and epilepsy

Women with IDD contemplating pregnancy face the same considerations as women with epilepsy in general. 175 Hormonal factors, effective contraception, and an awareness of potential teratogenicity (structural, developmental, and neurodevelopmental) should be incorporated into the overall management from the moment an ASM is initiated. 176 The same ASMs are considered appropriate in pregnancy among women with epilepsy and IDD as for women with epilepsy in general, but how information, consent, and adherence are managed will need to be handled differently. Counseling before conception will need to discuss not only genetic aspects and the risk of passing the condition on but also the individual's ability to look after her condition during pregnancy and the baby after delivery, as well as the need for support to ensure the safety of the mother and the baby. In a review article on sexual and reproductive healthcare for women with IDD, but not specifically epilepsy, practice recommendations were provided to guide primary care clinicians in managing the many different aspects involved. 177 A population‐based study on pregnancy and birth outcomes in Sweden in women with IDD showed that a higher proportion of women with IDD were teenagers, obese, smoked more often, and were single compared with women without IDD. 178 Among these, a medical history of epilepsy at the first antenatal visit was registered 14 times more often for women with IDD (5.5%) than for women without IDD (0.4%). Women with IDD had more often a preterm birth, cesarean section, non‐use of nitrous oxide, and discharge from hospital to a place other than home. The study concluded that pregnant women with IDD should be considered a risk group, requiring better tailored pre‐ and intrapartum care and support. 178

7 GASTROINTESTINAL ISSUES

The dual relationship between the gut and the brain is reinforced by evidence that patients with epilepsy are reportedly more likely to have functional gastrointestinal disorders compared with healthy individuals. 7 These disorders include irritable bowel syndrome, functional constipation, and functional dyspepsia. 7 , 179 The reason for this derives from the interplay between the enteric system, the vagal nerve, the immune and neuroendocrine systems, as well as substances produced by the gut‐residing microbiota, an increasingly studied area within epilepsy. 180 , 181 , 182 Furthermore, patients with inflammatory bowel diseases may have a higher chance of developing seizures than those without. 183 There are many gastrointestinal disorders in people with IDD and epilepsy, but they are generally not well studied. 7 Carers of people with IDD and epilepsy often report constipation as a trigger for seizures. 184 Additionally, both constipation and diarrhea have been reported as side effects of ASMs. 7 Drooling is a significant problem in individuals with physical comorbidities, and seizure frequency needs to be monitored if anticholinergic agents are used in view of the potential for seizure exacerbation. 185 Botulin toxin injections for sialorrhea may be considered. 186 Where there is a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG), adherence to medication can continue during intercurrent illness, but this can be associated with its own complications. 187 There may be interactions between ASMs and medications frequently used for gastrointestinal disorders, such as proton pump inhibitors. 188 When managing patients with combined epilepsy and IDD, clinicians need to review how gastrointestinal disease, epileptic seizures, and the drugs used to treat each condition influence one another and adjust ASM treatment accordingly.

7.1 Dietary treatments

There are certain nutritionally responsive epilepsies, often associated with IDD, that require specific management within metabolic services, such as GLUT1 deficiency. 189 Others include pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency (PDCD 190 ), succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH 191 ) deficiency, non‐ketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), creatine deficiency syndromes, and vitamin‐responsive epilepsies. Epilepsy and IDD are common among individuals with GLUT1 deficiency, with one study reporting epilepsy in 83% and IDD in 50% of affected individuals. 189 Treatment of epilepsy in GLUT1 deficiency is the same as for those without IDD, with the ketogenic diet as first‐line treatment, 192 with additional support as discussed below.

More generally, outside of metabolic disorders, dietary therapies, including ketogenic approaches, remain a potential option for drug‐resistant epilepsy but require careful consideration in adults with IDD. 193 , 194 , 195 , 196 , 197 While such treatments may be beneficial in selected individuals, their use is often limited by practical and clinical challenges. Strict dietary adherence may be difficult to achieve due to feeding problems, 28 , 198 sensory sensitivities, behavioral rigidity, 113 and reduced capacity to understand or participate in the dietary plan. Gastrointestinal comorbidities such as constipation, gastroesophageal reflux, or slowed gastric emptying 7 , 193 , 194 , 199 may further complicate tolerance and increase the risk of adverse events, including dehydration and metabolic instability.

The successful implementation of ketogenic diets in this population typically requires multidisciplinary support from epilepsy specialists, dietitians, metabolic teams, caregivers, and residential staff. Monitoring must be rigorous and regular, considering the person's weight, hydration status, bowel habits, and biochemical parameters. 200 Caregiver burden is often substantial, and the overall benefit–risk profile must be discussed in detail. Patient characteristics that could guide such benefit–risk considerations include characteristics associated with the epilepsy profile (seizure burden, drug resistance, underlying cause, other treatment options), the patient's medical and nutritional status (including comorbidities such as metabolic disorders incompatible with ketosis), as well as cognitive ability and behavioral‐related factors, and consideration of the family or caregiving setting. The ILAE provides recommendations and a useful resource for the pre‐assessment of patients for ketogenic diet therapy for drug‐resistant epilepsy. 201 Dietary therapies should be reserved for individuals in whom potential benefits outweigh the practical and medical constraints, and for whom appropriate support can be reliably guaranteed.

8 VACCINATION

In general, vaccination is recommended, where indicated, for individuals with epilepsy, 202 , 203 and should only be postponed in cases of moderate to severe acute illness to avoid overlapping of vaccine adverse effects with symptoms of the underlying disease. Indeed, a lack of capacity to consent should not prevent access to public health interventions. While vaccination may trigger febrile seizures in some DEEs, 204 such as Dravet syndrome, it does not alter disease progression. 205 Clinicians should in general encourage vaccination in patients with DEEs, as it helps prevent severe febrile infections. 206 In DEEs with febrile‐induced seizures, prophylactic antipyretics may be recommended to prevent fever. 207 Prophylactic measures with preventive antipyretic medication, for example, are recommended in Dravet syndrome due to the increased risk of prolonged seizures with fever. 206 In specific cases with seizures triggered by previous vaccines, subsequent vaccinations should be administered under medical supervision with prophylactic antipyretics, and inpatient revaccination protocols may be used if available.

9 PERSONALIZED MEDICINE

Personalized medicine in the management of epilepsy and IDD is increasingly recognized as a crucial approach to optimizing therapeutic outcomes and improving QoL. 208 Treatment selection must consider the heterogeneity of these conditions, considering genetic, clinical, and environmental factors that influence both seizure control and overall wellbeing. 209 , 210 Advances in genetic testing and biomarker identification have significantly contributed to the ability to tailor treatments in some conditions to individual patients. For example, the diagnosis of Dravet syndrome, often due to pathogenic variants in the sodium channel, voltage‐gated, type I, alpha subunit (SCN1A), leads to the avoidance of sodium channel blockers, more options for treatment, and may lead, in time, to targeted therapeutic strategies. Novel therapeutic approaches include antisense oligonucleotides (STK‐001), adenovirus‐mediated upregulation of transcription of SCN1A (ETX101), and CRISPR/Cas9 technology, among others. 211

The integration of pharmacogenomics into clinical practice may allow for better prediction of drug efficacy and adverse effects, reducing the trial‐and‐error approach that has traditionally characterized epilepsy treatment. Pharmacogenomics can reduce medication side effects by, for example, avoiding specific medications in people predisposed to allergic reactions, 212 and implementing different titration regimens in those who are slow metabolizers, for example, of brivaracetam or clobazam. 213 A recent consensus on rare epilepsies highlighted the importance of multidisciplinary care and early implementation of targeted therapies and non‐pharmacological interventions to optimize long‐term outcomes, especially during the transition to adulthood. 208 In Italy, a survey assessing the prevalence of single‐gene etiologies for DEEs revealed a significant increase in molecular diagnoses over the past decade, highlighting the critical role of genetic screening in guiding precision medicine strategies. 209

In addition to genetic considerations, the clinical phenotype plays a pivotal role in guiding therapy. Factors such as seizure type, frequency, severity, and associated comorbidities, including cognitive and behavioral difficulties, must be considered when selecting treatment options. 214 The choice of ASMs is influenced not only by seizure characteristics and epilepsy syndrome but also by the potential impact on cognitive function, behavior, and sleep. 215 As discussed above, personalized approaches aim to balance seizure control with QoL, minimizing side effects such as sedation or cognitive impairment. CBD, fenfluramine, and stiripentol have emerged as a promising adjunctive therapy for severe epilepsy in Dravet and Lennox–Gastaut syndromes. 216 , 217 , 218 , 219 , 220 , 221 CBD and everolimus have also shown efficacy in seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). 222 , 223 These examples further underscore the importance of targeted treatment approaches. 214 Personalization also extends to individualized rescue treatment protocols, as discussed above.

Despite advances, challenges remain in the widespread implementation of personalized medicine in DEEs as well as IDD in general. Limited access to genetic testing, variability in treatment response, and economic constraints pose significant barriers. 224 Addressing these challenges requires a multidisciplinary approach that includes education, advocacy, and policy initiatives to ensure equitable access. 208 Moving forward, efforts should focus on refining personalized treatment algorithms and integrating emerging technologies to further enhance individualized care strategies.

10 CONCLUSION

Effective management of adults with IDD and epilepsy requires a comprehensive, person‐centered, multidisciplinary approach to address the medical, cognitive, behavioral, and social dimensions (Figure 1). Uncontrolled seizures, polypharmacy, comorbidities, and behavioral challenges significantly affect the QoL of the individual and carers/family, imposing considerable social and economic burdens on patients, caregivers, and society. Implementing multidisciplinary team‐based care is critical, involving neurologists, psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, social‐care workers, and dedicated nursing support. 208 Such teams need to create personalized care plans, ensuring regular reviews and proactive collaboration with primary care physicians and caregivers to keep the patient's needs central (Figure 2). A protocol example has been proposed for establishing such multidisciplinary teams in TSC, 225 which includes the constitution of a core team of specialists guiding and coordinating the management for these patients with all members of the team and the caregivers. Acknowledging the complex interplay between epilepsy and IDD, particularly during critical life transitions, is essential for improving patient outcomes. Despite advancements, substantial gaps in equitable access to integrated care and tailored support services persist globally. Addressing these disparities through targeted research, guidelines, improved educational resources, and equitable resource allocation remains an urgent priority for enhancing QoL and reducing healthcare inequalities in this vulnerable population.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

Elena Fonseca: Consulting honoraria from UCB and Jazz Pharmaceuticals, and speaker fees, research funding, and travel support from UCB, Esteve, Eisai Inc., BIAL, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Angelini Pharma, and Sanofi Genzyme. Antonella Riva: Served on scientific advisory boards for Biocodex, UCB, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, and PTC Therapeutics, and received travel grants from Jazz Pharmaceuticals. Samuel López‐Maza: Travel support from Eisai Inc., Angelini Pharma, and Jazz Pharmaceuticals. Malin Zaddach: Fees for travel expenses, courses, and conference registration from Jazz Pharmaceuticals. Marie‐Claire Porter: Nothing to disclose. Ingo Borggraefe: Scientific grants from Roche; honoraria for speaker and advisory role from Desitin, Eisai, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Neuraxpharm, UCB, Ethypharm, Stoke Pharmaceutics; member of data safety monitoring board for Praxis Pharma. Lance Watkins: Honoraria for speaker and educational work from Veriton Pharma and UCB, outside of this project. Andreas Schulze‐Bonhage: Received research support from DFG, EU, German Ministry of Science and NIH, as well as from Precisis and UNEEG; received personal honoraria for lectures or advice from Angelini Pharma, BIAL, Livanova, Precisis, UCB, and UNEEG. Rohit Shankar: There is no direct disclosure or conflict of interest for this submitted body of work. RS developed the non‐commercial and free to use SUDEP and Seizure Safety Checklist and the EpSMon app to reduce the risk of SUDEP and enhance seizure safety. RS is the Chief Investigator of the NIHR adopted national Ep‐ID register. The Register is supported and monitored by the National Institute of Health Research UK. The funding for each molecule examined by the Register is via an Investigator Initiated Support grant from each of the molecule's parent company. The funding is to RS's NHS institution and goes toward the salary of the research coordinator and the institution's project oversight costs. The contributing companies till date include Eisai, UCB, Bial, Jazz Pharmaceuticals (previously GW Pharmaceuticals), and Angelini. This work sits outside the submitted work. In addition to the above, RS has received institutional research, travel support, and/or honorarium for talks and expert advisory boards from LivaNova, UCB, Eisai, Neuraxpharm, Veriton Pharma, Bial, Angelini, UnEEG, and GW/Jazz Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. He holds or has held competitive grants from various national grant bodies including Innovate, Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (ESPRC), National Institute of Health Research (NIHR), NHS Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI), and other funding bodies, including charities, all outside this work. Pasquale Striano: Fees for advisory board participation, lectures, and research support from UCB, Zogenix, GW/Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, Biocodex, and Angelini Pharma. Lina Nashef: Fees for advisory board participation, lectures, and research support from Jazz Pharmaceuticals, UCB, and Angelini Pharma.

Test yourself

What is a key challenge in diagnosing epilepsy in adults with intellectual development disorders? Accurate seizure diaries

Access to imaging

Communication barriers

Availability of neurologists

Which of the following is correct regarding quality of life (QoL) evaluation in people with intellectual development disorders (IDD) and epilepsy? QoL priorities of people with IDD and epilepsy need to be better defined

Seizure freedom is the only determining factor for a better QoL in this group

Polypharmacy and antiseizure medication side effects do not influence QoL

Available instruments can be used in this population, as in other people with epilepsy

Transition from pediatric to adult care is most hindered by: Pediatric care being less specialized

Adult neurologists have less expertise

Disruption of continuity of care

Reduction of seizures at transition

Which aspects should be considered when evaluating sleep quality in people with intellectual development disorders and epilepsy? Insomnia, arousals, and daytime sleepiness

Nocturnal seizures

Medications that could disrupt or benefit sleep quality

All of the above

What is correct regarding epilepsy in women with intellectual development disorders (IDD) and epilepsy? The combined contraceptive pill is the only option for managing catamenial exacerbation of seizures

Potential interaction of hormonal therapies and some antiseizure medications need to be considered

All hormonal therapies are contraindicated in those on lamotrigine

Bone health need not be considered in relation to contraception in people with IDD and epilepsy

What is false regarding vaccinations in people with intellectual development disorders (IDD) and epilepsy? Vaccination is generally, where indicated, recommended for people with IDD and epilepsy

In patients with febrile‐induced seizures, prophylactic antipyretics may be recommended before a vaccine is administered

In some syndromes with febrile seizures, vaccinations alter disease progression in the long term, so they should be avoided

If there is a history of previous vaccination‐induced seizures, subsequent vaccinations should be administered under medical supervision with prophylactic antipyretics

What is a key challenge in the medical treatment of epilepsy for people with intellectual development disorders? Limited self‐reporting of adverse events, seizure semiology, and frequency

The effect of polytherapy on psychological and cognitive function

Misdiagnosis of non‐epileptic seizures as epilepsy, which may lead to overmedication

All of the above

Adaptations of service provision for people with intellectual development disorders (IDD) and epilepsy may include all but one of the following: Availability of resources close to community‐based services

Providing sufficient time for outpatient visits, adapted to the needs of the individual

Allowing carers to stay overnight during hospital admissions

Segregating people with IDD and epilepsy from community‐based healthcare resources, since they can only be managed at specialized epilepsy units

People with intellectual development disorders and epilepsy are at higher risk of: Fractures

Higher mortality rates

Sudden death in epilepsy

All of the above

Appropriate management of cognitive and behavioral comorbidities of people with intellectual development disorders and epilepsy includes: Focusing on neuroleptics as the only treatment strategy for controlling these symptoms

Choosing an antiseizure medication regimen for seizure control without concern for psychiatric side effects

Reducing polypharmacy and total drug load with careful titration

Prioritizing seizure management since cognitive and behavioral symptoms cannot be improved

Answers may be found in the Supporting information .

Supporting information

Data S1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The manuscript was written by the authors with medical writing and reference consolidation provided by Rebecca Hurst, PhD, supported by Joelle Buck, PhD, on behalf of Syneos Health, London, UK, and editorial support provided by Chiara Lee, of Syneos Health, London, UK. This support was funded by Jazz Pharmaceuticals in accordance with Good Publication Practice (GPP) 2022 guidelines (http://www.ismpp.org/gpp3). Jazz Pharmaceuticals also reviewed the manuscript but had no input into the writing of the manuscript. The content of this manuscript and the decision to submit it for publication in Epileptic Disorders was made by the authors.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

APPENDIX A CLINICAL CASE STUDIES

Case 1

A 21‐year‐old woman with cyclin‐dependent kinase‐like 5 (CDKL5)‐associated developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) has had a severe neurodevelopmental disorder and drug‐resistant epilepsy since the age of 2 months with myoclonic, tonic, and multifocal seizures. She currently has intellectual development disorders, microcephaly, tetraparesis, dysphagia (she feeds through a gastrostomy), bisphincteric incontinence, chronic constipation, alteration of sleep–wake cycle, and behavior disorder. Her treatment when she was first evaluated in the epilepsy clinic after transition to adult care included phenobarbital, rufinamide, vigabatrin, and risperidone. A recently initiated ketogenic diet resulted in a slight reduction in seizure frequency.

However, shortly after the transition visit, she presented an emergency on several occasions with respiratory failure secondary to recurrent aspiration and required non‐invasive ventilatory support on one occasion. She developed significant behavioral disturbance during admission, leading to an increase in doses of neuroleptics, which worsened her alertness and cognitive state. Her seizures became more frequent and severe during admission.

Following evaluation by the nutrition and physical therapy support teams, slowed gastric emptying was identified, which along with the presence of ketones resulted in nausea and vomiting. After a multidisciplinary discussion, a progressive transition to a normal diet was carried out with significant improvement and no further episodes of aspiration. There was no significant increase in seizure frequency. Her alertness and behavioral symptoms also improved, allowing for de‐escalation of neuroleptic doses.

This case illustrates the need for a multidisciplinary assessment to address the complexity in this case. Non‐pharmacological approaches may be necessary to improve not only seizures but also nutrition and behavior, and reduce morbidity in similar cases.

Case 2

A 23‐year‐old man with generalized epilepsy of unknown etiology presented aged 2 years. Brain imaging, lumbar puncture, and genetic testing were not diagnostic. He has intellectual development disorders with speech and language delay. In childhood, he experienced tonic, atonic, absence, and generalized tonic–clonic seizures (GTCS) in addition to non‐convulsive status. GTCS became rare following VNS. In the adult clinic, his main presentation was of prolonged non‐convulsive status, a state that fluctuated in severity. Accurate seizure counts of absences/non‐convulsive status were not possible. His family reported discrete, frequent daily events when he ‘zoned out’ for variable periods and prolonged periods when he was less interactive, such that his parents found it difficult to feed and hydrate him. EEG showed almost constant generalized epileptiform discharges. Medications tried with some benefit included revisiting valproate, ethosuximide, topiramate, perampanel, and clobazam, but tolerance limited doses and benefit.

Within the framework of a Lennox–Gastaut‐like presentation, he was started on cannabidiol (CBD, Epidyolex® [EU]/Epidiolex® [US]) as add‐on treatment to valproate (valproate was later reduced to 400 mg twice daily due to liver enzyme rises which settled), clobazam 5 mg AM and 10 mg PM. His parents had also reduced his topiramate to 15 mg, only giving it to him every 3 days, which they felt was the maximum he could tolerate. When last seen, the CBD dose had been titrated to 400 mg twice daily (weight ~68 kg). The addition of CBD resulted in a response which his parents felt was ‘fantastic’: ‘zoning out’ episodes became infrequent; he was eating and drinking normally; they reported a ‘reawakening’; he had become much more engaged and was learning new words. He was more steady walking, including up and down stairs. His behavior was reportedly good, though some repetitive behavior was more evident. Repeat EEG still showed generalized discharges, less frequently than before. Further titration of his medication is planned. This case illustrates a clear benefit associated with ASMs, in this case CBD, with reduced epileptiform activity on EEG, better cognition, daily function and behavior, with improved QoL for the individual and his family.


REFERENCES

1 Robertson J , Hatton C , Emerson E , Baines S . Prevalence of epilepsy among people with intellectual disabilities: a systematic review. Seizure. 2015;29:46–62. 10.1016/j.seizure.2015.03.016 26076844
2 McKenzie K , Milton M , Smith G , Ouellette‐Kuntz H . Systematic review of the prevalence and incidence of intellectual disabilities: current trends and issues. Curr Dev Disord Rep. 2016;3(2):104–115. 10.1007/s40474-016-0085-7
3 Patel DR , Cabral MD , Ho A , Merrick J . A clinical primer on intellectual disability. Transl Pediatr. 2020;9(Suppl 1):S23–S35. 10.21037/tp.2020.02.02 32206581 PMC7082244
4 Committee to Evaluate the Supplemental Security Income Disability Program for Children with Mental Disorders , Board on the Health of Select Populations; Board on Children, Youth, and Families , Institute of Medicine , Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education , The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . In: Boat TF , Wu JT , editors. Mental disorders and disabilities among low‐income children. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2015 Oct 28. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK332877/. Accessed 6 Mar 2025.26632628
5 O'Dwyer M , Watkins L , McCallion P , McCarron M , Henman M , Shankar R . Optimising medicines use in older adults with intellectual disability who have epilepsy: challenges and perspectives. Ther Adv Drug Saf. 2021;12:20420986211025156. 10.1177/20420986211025157 PMC8361510 34394909
6 Kerr M , Linehan C , Brandt C , Kanemoto K , Kawasaki J , Sugai K , et al. Behavioral disorder in people with an intellectual disability and epilepsy: A report of the Intellectual Disability Task Force of the Neuropsychiatric Commission of ILAE. Epilepsia Open. 2016;1(3–4):102–111. 10.1002/epi4.12018 29588933 PMC5719831
7 Avorio F , Cerulli Irelli E , Morano A , Fanella M , Orlando B , Albini M , et al. Functional gastrointestinal disorders in patients with epilepsy: reciprocal influence and impact on seizure occurrence. Front Neurol. 2021;12:705126. 10.3389/fneur.2021.705126 34421803 PMC8377227
8 Licheni SH , Mcmahon JM , Schneider AL , Davey MJ , Scheffer IE . Sleep problems in Dravet syndrome: a modifiable comorbidity. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2018;60(2):192–198. 10.1111/dmcn.13601 29110313
9 Rodda JM , Scheffer IE , McMahon JM , Berkovic SF , Graham HK . Progressive gait deterioration in adolescents with Dravet syndrome. Arch Neurol. 2012;69(7):873–878. 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3275 22409937
10 Branford D , Sun JJ , Burrows L , Shankar R . Patterns of antiseizure medications prescribing in people with intellectual disability and epilepsy: a narrative review and analysis. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2023;89(7):2028–2038. 10.1111/bcp.15748 37060156
11 Young C , Shankar R , Palmer J , Craig J , Hargreaves C , McLean B , et al. Does intellectual disability increase sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) risk? Seizure. 2015;25:112–116. 10.1016/j.seizure.2014.10.001 25457453
12 Kerr M , Linehan C , Thompson R , Mula M , Gil‐Nagal A , Zuberi SM , et al. A White Paper on the medical and social needs of people with epilepsy and intellectual disability: the Task Force on Intellectual Disabilities and Epilepsy of the International League Against Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2014;55(12):1902–1906. 10.1111/epi.12848 25378101
13 Kerr MP , Watkins LV , Angus‐Leppan H , Corp A , Goodwin M , Hanson C , et al. The provision of care to adults with an intellectual disability in the UK. A special report from the intellectual disability UK chapter ILAE. Seizure. 2018;56:41–46. 10.1016/j.seizure.2018.01.026 29428900
14 Shillito T , Watkins L , Ali H , Page G , Pullen A , Mitchell S , et al. Evidencing the challenges of care delivery for people with intellectual disability and epilepsy in England by using the step together toolkit. BJPsych Open. 2024;10(6):e186. 10.1192/bjo.2024.749 39465582 PMC11698203
15 Shankar R . Managing epilepsy in people with intellectual disabilities—creating capable communities. BJPsych Adv. 2023;29(5):305–307. 10.1192/bja.2023.19
16 Blümcke I , Arzimanoglou A , Beniczky S , Wiebe S . Roadmap for a competency‐based educational curriculum in epileptology: report of the Epilepsy Education Task Force of the International League Against Epilepsy. Epileptic Disord. 2019;21(2):129–140. 10.1684/epd.2019.1039 30892268
17 Bild . Step Together: Integrating Care for People with Epilepsy and a Learning Disability. 2020. Available from: https://www.bild.org.uk/wp‐content/uploads/2020/11/Step‐Together‐17‐November‐2020‐Download‐Link‐.pdf. Accessed 12 Jun 2025.
18 Sun JJ , Watkins L , Henley W , Laugharne R , Angus‐Leppan H , Sawhney I , et al. Mortality risk in adults with intellectual disabilities and epilepsy: an England and Wales case‐control study. J Neurol. 2023;270(7):3527–3536. 10.1007/s00415-023-11701-6 37022478 PMC10078066
19 Liao P , Vajdic CM , Reppermund S , Cvejic RC , Watkins TR , Srasuebkul P , et al. Readmission and emergency department presentation after hospitalisation for epilepsy in people with intellectual disability: a data linkage study. PLoS One. 2022;17(8):e0272439. 10.1371/journal.pone.0272439 35913969 PMC9342714
20 Glover G , Williams R , Tompkins G , Oyinlola J . An observational study of the use of acute hospital care by people with intellectual disabilities in England. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2019;63(2):85–99. 10.1111/jir.12544 30221429
21 Laugharne R , Wilcock M , Rees J , Wainwright D , Newton N , Sterritt J , et al. Clinical characteristics of people with intellectual disability admitted to hospital with constipation: identifying possible specific high‐risk factors. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2024;68(3):277–284. 10.1111/jir.13108 38031737
22 Glover G , Evison F . Hospital admissions that should not happen. 2013. Available from: https://acppld.csp.org.uk/system/files/ld_and_hospital_admissions_in_england_‐_2013.pdf. Accessed 20 Feb 2025.
23 Puka K , Lou SM , Moineddin R , Snead OC , Widjaja E . Health resource utilization varies by comorbidities in children with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2016;57(Pt A):151–154. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.02.011 26953845
24 Sun JJ , Perera B , Henley W , Angus‐Leppan H , Sawhney I , Watkins L , et al. Epilepsy related multimorbidity, polypharmacy and risks in adults with intellectual disabilities: a national study. J Neurol. 2022;269(5):2750–2760. 10.1007/s00415-021-10938-3 35067759
25 Chang CK , Chen CY , Broadbent M , Stewart R , O'Hara J . Hospital admissions for respiratory system diseases in adults with intellectual disabilities in Southeast London: a register‐based cohort study. BMJ Open. 2017;7(3):e014846. 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014846 PMC5372120 28360254
26 Thompson R , Kerr M , Glynn M , Linehan C . Caring for a family member with intellectual disability and epilepsy: practical, social and emotional perspectives. Seizure. 2014;23(10):856–863. 10.1016/j.seizure.2014.07.005 25086700
27 Pennington M , Prince E , Bateman N , Gray J , Croudace TJ , Redley M , et al. Factors influencing the costs of epilepsy in adults with an intellectual disability. Seizure. 2012;21(3):205–210. 10.1016/j.seizure.2011.12.012 22285238
28 The Royal College of Psychiatrists . Management of epilepsy in adults with intellectual disability (CR203 May 2017). 2017. Available from: https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/improving‐care/campaigning‐for‐better‐mental‐health‐policy/college‐reports/2017‐college‐reports/management‐of‐epilepsy‐in‐adults‐with‐intellectual‐disability‐cr203‐may‐2017. Accessed 12 Jun 2025.
29 Mbuba CK , Ngugi AK , Newton CR , Carter JA . The epilepsy treatment gap in developing countries: a systematic review of the magnitude, causes, and intervention strategies. Epilepsia. 2008;49(9):1491–1503. 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01693.x 18557778 PMC3573323
30 Kariuki SM , Thomas PT , Newton CR . Epilepsy stigma in children in low‐income and middle‐income countries. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2021;5(5):314–316. 10.1016/S2352-4642(21)00090-0 33864740 PMC7613551
31 Scior K , Hamid A , Hastings R , Werner S , Belton C , Laniyan A , et al. Consigned to the margins: a call for global action to challenge intellectual disability stigma. Lancet Glob Health. 2016;4(5):e294–e295. 10.1016/S2214-109X(16)00060-7 27102188
32 Hassanein EEA , Adawi TR , Johnson ES . Social support, resilience, and quality of life for families with children with intellectual disabilities. Res Dev Disabil. 2021;112:103910. 10.1016/j.ridd.2021.103910 33621821
33 Balachandran KP , Bhuvaneswari M . Expressed emotion in families of children with neurodevelopmental disorders: a mixed‐method approach. Ann Neurosci. 2024;31(2):105–114. 10.1177/09727531231181014 38694716 PMC11060128
34 McGrother CW , Bhaumik S , Thorp CF , Hauck A , Branford D , Watson JM . Epilepsy in adults with intellectual disabilities: prevalence, associations and service implications. Seizure. 2006;15(6):376–386. 10.1016/j.seizure.2006.04.002 16782360
35 Camfield PR , Andrade D , Camfield CS , Carrizosa‐Moog J , Appleton R , Baulac M , et al. How can transition to adult care be best orchestrated for adolescents with epilepsy? Epilepsy Behav. 2019;93:138–147. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2018.12.015 30642688
36 Boyce DM , Devinsky O , Meskis MA . Barriers to transition from pediatric to adult care for patients with Dravet syndrome: A focus group study of caregivers. Epilepsy Behav. 2020;109:107096. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2020.107096 32422576
37 Ortiz de Zarate Z , Fonseca E , Abraira L , Santamarina E , Campos‐Fernández D , Quintana M , et al. EPITRANS. Quality assessment of the epilepsy transition process. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2024;48:121–128. 10.1016/j.ejpn.2024.01.004 38241904
38 Geerlings RPJ , Aldenkamp AP , Gottmer‐Welschen LMC , de With PHN , Zinger S , van Staa AL , et al. Evaluation of a multidisciplinary epilepsy transition clinic for adolescents. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2016;20(3):385–392. 10.1016/j.ejpn.2016.01.003 26818400
39 Goselink RJM , Olsson I , Malmgren K , Reilly C . Transition to adult care in epilepsy: a systematic review. Seizure. 2022;101:52–59. 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.07.006 35901664
40 Calabrese S , Lee S , Mollica MA , Wiener L , Mendley S , Adams L , et al. Navigating pediatric to adult healthcare transition: A National Institutes of Health Workshop. J Pediatr. 2022;244:234–240.e1. 10.1016/j.jpeds.2022.01.052 35120980
41 Woodman AC , Mailick MR , Anderson KA , Esbensen AJ . Residential transitions among adults with intellectual disability across 20 years. Am J Intellect Dev Disabil. 2014;119(6):496–515. 10.1352/1944-7558-119.6.496 25354121 PMC4215165
42 Arrotta K , Thompson NR , Honomichl R , Najm I , Bingaman W , Busch R . Quality of life after epilepsy surgery: how domain‐specific cognitive changes impact QOL within the context of seizure outcome. Epilepsy Behav. 2022;137(Pt A):108948. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2022.108948 36283290
43 Chiang S , Moss R , Meskis MA , Vogel‐Farley V , Sullivan JE , Patel AD , et al. Impact of intellectual and developmental disability on quality‐of‐life priorities in adults with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2021;123:108282. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2021.108282 34509036 PMC11161194
44 Willems LM , Knake S , Rosenow F , Reese JP , Conradi N , Strzelczyk A . EuroQOL‐5D‐3L does not adequately map quality‐of‐life deterioration in severely affected patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2022;127:108554. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2022.108554 35063789
45 Payton KSE , Gould JB . Vignette research Methodology: an essential tool for quality improvement Collaboratives. Healthcare (Basel). 2022;11(1):7. 10.3390/healthcare11010007 36611468 PMC9818599
46 Auvin S , Nortvedt C , Fuller DS , Sahebkar F . Seizure‐free days as a novel outcome in patients with Lennox‐Gastaut syndrome: post hoc analysis of patients receiving cannabidiol in two randomized controlled trials. Epilepsia. 2023;64(7):1812–1820. 10.1111/epi.17618 37052803
47 Devi N . Supported decision‐making and personal autonomy for persons with intellectual disabilities: article 12 of the UN convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. J Law Med Ethics. 2013;41(4):792–806. 10.1111/jlme.12090 24446938
48 Dunn M , Strnadová I , Scully JL , Hansen J , Loblinzk J , Sarfaraz S , et al. Equitable and accessible informed healthcare consent process for people with intellectual disability: a systematic literature review. BMJ Qual Saf. 2024;33(5):328–339. 10.1136/bmjqs-2023-016113 PMC11041578 38071590
49 Chelak K , Chakole S . The role of social determinants of health in promoting health equality: a narrative review. Cureus. 2023;15(1):e33425. 10.7759/cureus.33425 36751221 PMC9899154
50 The Health Foundation . A framework for NHS action on social determinants of health. 2022. Available from: https://www.health.org.uk/sites/default/files/pdf/2022‐10/2022%20‐%20ICSs%20and%20social%20need.pdf. Accessed 26 Nov 2025.
51 Ali A , Scior K , Ratti V , Strydom A , King M , Hassiotis A . Discrimination and other barriers to accessing health care: perspectives of patients with mild and moderate intellectual disability and their carers. PLoS One. 2013;8(8):e70855. 10.1371/journal.pone.0070855 23951026 PMC3741324
52 Liao P , Vajdic CM , Reppermund S , Cvejic RC , Srasuebkul P , Trollor JN . Mortality rate, risk factors, and causes of death in people with epilepsy and intellectual disability. Seizure. 2022;101:75–82. 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.07.012 35932527
53 Asadi‐Pooya AA , Nikseresht A , Yaghoubi E , Nei M . Physical injuries in patients with epilepsy and their associated risk factors. Seizure. 2012;21(3):165–168. 10.1016/j.seizure.2011.10.009 22130005
54 Hassiotis A , Tanzarella M , Bebbington P , Cooper C . Prevalence and predictors of suicidal behaviour in a sample of adults with estimated borderline intellectual functioning: results from a population survey. J Affect Disord. 2011;129(1–3):380–384. 10.1016/j.jad.2010.10.002 21071092
55 Ludi E , Ballard ED , Greenbaum R , Pao M , Bridge J , Reynolds W , et al. Suicide risk in youth with intellectual disabilities: the challenges of screening. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2012;33(5):431–440. 10.1097/DBP.0b013e3182599295 22668827 PMC3464013
56 Winterhalder R , McCabe J , Young C , Lamb K , Sawhney I , Jory C , et al. Bone health, intellectual disability and epilepsy: an observational community‐based study. Acta Neurol Scand. 2022;145(6):753–761. 10.1111/ane.13612 35297524 PMC9310839
57 Berkvens JJL , Wyers CE , Mergler S , Beerhorst K , Verschuure P , Tan IY , et al. Incidence of clinical fractures: a 7‐year follow‐up study in institutionalized adults with epilepsy and intellectual disability. Seizure. 2021;92:56–61. 10.1016/j.seizure.2021.08.009 34438165
58 Robertson J , Hatton C , Emerson E , Baines S . Mortality in people with intellectual disabilities and epilepsy: a systematic review. Seizure. 2015;29:123–133. 10.1016/j.seizure.2015.04.004 26076855
59 Kiani R , Tyrer F , Jesu A , Bhaumik S , Gangavati S , Walker G , et al. Mortality from sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in a cohort of adults with intellectual disability. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2014;58(6):508–520. 10.1111/jir.12047 23647577
60 Forsgren L , Edvinsson SO , Nyström L , Blomquist HK . Influence of epilepsy on mortality in mental retardation: an epidemiologic study. Epilepsia. 1996;37(10):956–963. 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1996.tb00533.x 8822694
61 Whitney R , Sharma S , Jones KC , RamachandranNair R . Genetics and SUDEP: challenges and future directions. Seizure. 2023;110:188–193. 10.1016/j.seizure.2023.07.002 37413779
62 Devinsky O , Asato M , Camfield P , Geller E , Kanner AM , Keller S , et al. Delivery of epilepsy care to adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Neurology. 2015;85(17):1512–1521. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002060 26423430 PMC4631073
63 Poke G , Stanley J , Scheffer IE , Sadleir LG . Epidemiology of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy and of intellectual disability and epilepsy in children. Neurology. 2023;100(13):e1363–e1375. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206758 36581463 PMC10065214
64 Shankar R , Henley WE , Allaudin S , Watkins LV , Tromans SJ , Laugharne RA , et al. Epilepsy‐related premature mortality in adults with intellectual disability in England: a population‐based analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2026;97:325–334. 10.1136/jnnp-2025-337291 41371976
65 Harden C , Tomson T , Gloss D , Buchhalter J , Cross JH , Donner E , et al. Practice guideline summary: sudden unexpected death in epilepsy incidence rates and risk factors: report of the guideline development, dissemination, and implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society. Epilepsy Curr. 2017;17(3):180–187. 10.5698/1535-7511.17.3.180 28684957 PMC5486432
66 Watkins L , Henning O , Bassett P , Ashby S , Tromans S , Shankar R . Epilepsy professionals' views on sudden unexpected death in epilepsy counselling: a tale of two countries. Eur J Neurol. 2024;31(9):e16375. 10.1111/ene.16375 38837829 PMC11295158
67 SUDEP Action . SUDEP and Seizure Safety Checklist. Available from: https://sudep.org/about‐research/sudep‐and‐seizure‐safety‐checklist/. Accessed 12 Jun 2025.
68 Shankar R , Cox D , Jalihal V , Brown S , Hanna J , McLean B . Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP): development of a safety checklist. Seizure. 2013;22(10):812–817. 10.1016/j.seizure.2013.07.014 23962523
69 Shankar R , Walker M , McLean B , Laugharne R , Ferrand F , Hanna J , et al. Steps to prevent SUDEP: the validity of risk factors in the SUDEP and seizure safety checklist: a case control study. J Neurol. 2016;263(9):1840–1846. 10.1007/s00415-016-8203-3 27334909
70 Watkins L , Shankar R . Reducing the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2018;20(10):40. 10.1007/s11940-018-0527-0 30136125
71 Watkins L , Shankar R , Sander JW . Identifying and mitigating sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) risk factors. Expert Rev Neurother. 2018;18(4):265–274. 10.1080/14737175.2018.1439738 29425076
72 Young C , Shankar R , Henley W , Rose A , Cheatle K , Sander JW . SUDEP and seizure safety communication: assessing if people hear and act. Epilepsy Behav. 2018;86:200–203. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2018.06.040 30007785
73 Shankar R , Henley W , Boland C , Laugharne R , McLean BN , Newman C , et al. Decreasing the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: structured communication of risk factors for premature mortality in people with epilepsy. Eur J Neurol. 2018;25(9):1121–1127. 10.1111/ene.13651 29611888
74 Ninnoni JPK . A qualitative study of the communication and information needs of people with learning disabilities and epilepsy with physicians, nurses and carers. BMC Neurol. 2019;19(1):12. 10.1186/s12883-018-1235-9 30660202 PMC6339405
75 Kerr M , Goodwin G , Hanna J . Epilepsy, intellectual disability and the epilepsy care pathway: improving outcomes. BJPsych Adv. 2023;29(5):295–304. 10.1192/bja.2022.64
76 Nashef L , Singh R , Moran N , Murphy E . Investigating adults with early‐onset epilepsy and intellectual or physical disability. Pract Neurol. 2019;19(2):115–130. 10.1136/practneurol-2018-001965 30679263
77 Hebbar M , Mefford HC . Recent advances in epilepsy genomics and genetic testing. F1000Res. 2020;9:185. 10.12688/f1000research.21366.1 PMC7076331 32201576
78 Medyanik AD , Anisimova PE , Kustova AO , Tarabykin VS , Kondakova EV . Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: pathogenesis of intellectual disability beyond channelopathies. Biomolecules. 2025;15(1):133. 10.3390/biom15010133 39858526 PMC11763800
79 Jakimiec M , Paprocka J , Śmigiel R . CDKL5 deficiency disorder—a complex epileptic encephalopathy. Brain Sci. 2020;10(2):107. 10.3390/brainsci10020107 32079229 PMC7071516
80 Gowda VK , Amoghimath R , Battina M , Shivappa SK , Benakappa N . Case series of early SCN1A‐related developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. J Pediatr Neurosci. 2021;16(3):212–217. 10.4103/jpn.JPN_99_20 36160609 PMC9496615
81 Brunklaus A , Brünger T , Feng T , Fons C , Lehikoinen A , Panagiotakaki E , et al. The gain of function SCN1A disorder spectrum: novel epilepsy phenotypes and therapeutic implications. Brain. 2022;145(11):3816–3831. 10.1093/brain/awac210 35696452 PMC9679167
82 Zhang G , Huang S , Wei M , Wu Y , Xie Z , Wang J . Dravet syndrome: novel insights into SCN1A‐mediated epileptic neurodevelopmental disorders within the molecular diagnostic‐therapeutic framework. Front Neurosci. 2025;19:1634718. 10.3389/fnins.2025.1634718 40772259 PMC12326748
83 Johannessen Landmark C , Potschka H , Auvin S , Wilmshurst JM , Johannessen SI , Kasteleijn‐Nolst Trenité D , et al. The role of new medical treatments for the management of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: novel concepts and results. Epilepsia. 2021;62(4):857–873. 10.1111/epi.16849 33638459
84 van Rijckevorsel K . Treatment of Lennox‐Gastaut syndrome: overview and recent findings. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008;4(6):1001–1019. 10.2147/ndt.s1668 19337447 PMC2646636
85 Chapman M , Iddon P , Atkinson K , Brodie C , Mitchell D , Parvin G , et al. The misdiagnosis of epilepsy in people with intellectual disabilities: a systematic review. Seizure. 2011;20(2):101–106. 10.1016/j.seizure.2010.10.030 21123090
86 Arain A , Shihabuddin B , Niaz F , Modur P , Taylor H , Fakhoury T , et al. Epilepsy and the impact of an epileptology clinic for patients with mental retardation and associated disabilities in an institutional setting. Epilepsia. 2006;47(12):2052–2057. 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00862.x 17201703
87 Brunnhuber F , Slater J , Goyal S , Amin D , Thorvardsson G , Freestone DR , et al. Past, present and future of home video‐electroencephalographic telemetry: a review of the development of in‐home video‐electroencephalographic recordings. Epilepsia. 2020;61(Suppl 1):S3–S10. 10.1111/epi.16578 32683686
88 Kadiwal M , Donner EJ , Moharir M , Ochi A , Otsubo H , Sharma R , et al. A video is worth a thousand words: the use of home videos in pediatric neurology. Can J Neurol Sci. 2024;51(1):126–128. 10.1017/cjn.2023.22 36847162
89 Beniczky S , Wiebe S , Jeppesen J , Tatum WO , Brazdil M , Wang Y , et al. Automated seizure detection using wearable devices: a clinical practice guideline of the International League Against Epilepsy and the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Epilepsia. 2021;62(3):632–646. 10.1111/epi.16818 33666944
90 Meinert E , Milne‐Ives M , Sawyer J , Boardman L , Mitchell S , Mclean B , et al. Subcutaneous electroencephalography monitoring for people with epilepsy and intellectual disability: co‐production workshops. BJPsych Open. 2024;11(1):e3. 10.1192/bjo.2024.825 39668625 PMC11733491
91 Zhang J , Swinnen L , Chatzichristos C , Broux V , Proost R , Jansen K , et al. Multimodal wearable EEG, EMG and accelerometry measurements improve the accuracy of tonic‐clonic seizure detection. Physiol Meas. 2024;45(6):065005. 10.1088/1361-6579/ad4e94 38772401
92 Proost R , Macea J , Lagae L , Van Paesschen W , Jansen K . Wearable detection of tonic seizures in childhood epilepsy: an exploratory cohort study. Epilepsia. 2023;64(11):3013–3024. 10.1111/epi.17756 37602476
93 Bruno E , Böttcher S , Viana PF , Amengual‐Gual M , Joseph B , Epitashvili N , et al. Wearable devices for seizure detection: practical experiences and recommendations from the Wearables for Epilepsy And Research (WEAR) International Study Group. Epilepsia. 2021;62(10):2307–2321. 10.1111/epi.17044 34420211
94 Arends J , Thijs RD , Gutter T , Ungureanu C , Cluitmans P , Van Dijk J , et al. Multimodal nocturnal seizure detection in a residential care setting: a long‐term prospective trial. Neurology. 2018;91(21):e2010–e2019. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006545 30355702 PMC6260200
95 Lazeron RHC , Thijs RD , Arends J , Gutter T , Cluitmans P , Van Dijk J , et al. Multimodal nocturnal seizure detection: do we need to adapt algorithms for children? Epilepsia Open. 2022;7(3):406–413. 10.1002/epi4.12618 35666848 PMC9436288
96 Armand Larsen S , Terney D , Østerkjerhuus T , Vinding Merinder T , Annala K , Knight A , et al. Automated detection of nocturnal motor seizures using an audio‐video system. Brain Behav. 2022;12(9):e2737. 10.1002/brb3.2737 35939047 PMC9480955
97 Zabler N , Biondi A , Kalousios S , Novitskaya Y , Faber H , Dümpelmann M , et al. Clinical utility of an ambulatory absence seizure detection system. Epilepsia Open. 2025;10(5):1733–1739. 10.1002/epi4.70138 40932588 PMC12514394
98 Shankar R , Rowe C , Van Hoorn A , Henley W , Laugharne R , Cox D , et al. Under representation of people with epilepsy and intellectual disability in research. PLoS One. 2018;13(6):e0198261. 10.1371/journal.pone.0198261 29927966 PMC6013187
99 Ricci E , Turner K , De Ponti E , Ferrera G , Zambrelli EOT , Tumminelli G , et al. Psychogenic non‐epileptic seizures in individuals with intellectual disability/borderline cognitive function: characterization through a comparison study. Seizure. 2024;121:1–7. 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.007 39033709
100 van Ool JS , Haenen AI , Snoeijen‐Schouwenaars FM , Aldenkamp AP , Hendriksen JGM , Schelhaas HJ , et al. Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures in adults with epilepsy and intellectual disability: a neglected area. Seizure. 2018;59:67–71. 10.1016/j.seizure.2018.05.002 29754013
101 Rawlings GH , Novakova B , Beail N , Reuber M . What do we know about non‐epileptic seizures in adults with intellectual disability: a narrative review. Seizure. 2021;91:437–446. 10.1016/j.seizure.2021.07.021 34332255
102 Uldall P , Alving J , Hansen LK , Kibaek M , Buchholt J . The misdiagnosis of epilepsy in children admitted to a tertiary epilepsy centre with paroxysmal events. Arch Dis Child. 2006;91(3):219–221. 10.1136/adc.2004.064477 16492886 PMC2065931
103 Gasparini S , Beghi E , Ferlazzo E , Beghi M , Belcastro V , Biermann KP , et al. Management of psychogenic non‐epileptic seizures: a multidisciplinary approach. Eur J Neurol. 2019;26(2):205–213, e12–e15. 10.1111/ene.13818 30300463
104 The Royal College of Psychiatrists . Prescribing anti‐epileptic drugs for people with epilepsy and intellectual disability (CR206 Oct 2017). 2017. Available from: https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/improving‐care/campaigning‐for‐better‐mental‐health‐policy/college‐reports/2017‐college‐reports/prescribing‐anti‐epileptic‐drugs‐for‐people‐with‐epilepsy‐and‐intellectual‐disability‐cr206‐oct‐2017. Accessed 3 Jul 2025.
105 Watkins L , O'Dwyer M , Kerr M , Scheepers M , Courtenay K , Shankar R . Quality improvement in the management of people with epilepsy and intellectual disability: the development of clinical guidance. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2020;21(2):173–181. 10.1080/14656566.2019.1695780 31790280
106 Watkins LV , Kinney M , Shankar R . Treatment of seizures in people with intellectual disability. CNS Drugs. 2025;39(2):161–183. 10.1007/s40263-024-01149-1 39752068
107 Watkins LV , Henley W , Sun JJ , Perera B , Angus‐Leppan H , Sawhney I , et al. Tackling increased risks in older adults with intellectual disability and epilepsy: data from a national multicentre cohort study. Seizure. 2022;101:15–21. 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.05.022 35850018
108 Carson L , Parlatini V , Safa T , Baig B , Shetty H , Phillips‐Owen J , et al. The association between early childhood onset epilepsy and attention‐deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in 3237 children and adolescents with autism Spectrum disorder (ASD): a historical longitudinal cohort data linkage study. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2023;32(11):2129–2138. 10.1007/s00787-022-02041-3 35927526 PMC10576710
109 Wang M , Zhao Q , Kang H , Zhu S . Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children with epilepsy. Ir J Med Sci. 2020;189(1):305–313. 10.1007/s11845-019-02042-3 31187336
110 Watkins LV , Linehan C , Brandt C , Snoeijen‐Schouwenaars F , McGowan P , Shankar R . Epilepsy in adults with neurodevelopmental disability—what every neurologist should know. Epileptic Disord. 2022;24(1):9–25. 10.1684/epd.2021.1366 34750095
111 Badger S , Watkins LV , Bassett P , Roy A , Eyeoyibo M , Sawhney I , et al. The relationship between clinical presentation and the nature of care in adults with intellectual disability and epilepsy—national comparative cohort study. BJPsych Open. 2024;10(3):e94. 10.1192/bjo.2024.45 38686441 PMC11060072
112 Akrout Brizard B , Limbu B , Baeza‐Velasco C , Deb S . Association between epilepsy and psychiatric disorders in adults with intellectual disabilities: systematic review and meta‐analysis. BJPsych Open. 2021;7(3):e95. 10.1192/bjo.2021.55 33938422 PMC8142548
113 van Ool JS , Snoeijen‐Schouwenaars FM , Tan IY , Jurgen Schelhaas H , Aldenkamp AP , Hendriksen JGM . Challenging behavior in adults with epilepsy and intellectual disability: an analysis of epilepsy characteristics. Epilepsy Behav. 2018;86:72–78. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2018.06.028 30153936
114 Deb S , Akrout Brizard B , Limbu B . Association between epilepsy and challenging behaviour in adults with intellectual disabilities: systematic review and meta‐analysis. BJPsych Open. 2020;6(5):e114. 10.1192/bjo.2020.96 32972481 PMC7576663
115 Kinney MO , Chester V , Tromans S , Alexander RT , Angus‐Leppan H , Bagary M , et al. Epilepsy, anti‐seizure medication, intellectual disability and challenging behaviour—everyone's business, no one's priority. Seizure. 2020;81:111–116. 10.1016/j.seizure.2020.07.018 32777744
116 Royston R , Naughton S , Hassiotis A , Jahoda A , Ali A , Chauhan U , et al. Complex interventions for aggressive challenging behaviour in adults with intellectual disability: a rapid realist review informed by multiple populations. PLoS One. 2023;18(5):e0285590. 10.1371/journal.pone.0285590 37200247 PMC10194976
117 Moon S , Watkins L , O'Dwyer M , Shankar R . Relationship between anti‐seizure medication and behaviors that challenge in older persons with intellectual disability and epilepsy: a review. Expert Rev Neurother. 2024;24(11):1097–1105. 10.1080/14737175.2024.2393322 39160772
118 Doran Z , Shankar R , Keezer MR , Dale C , McLean B , Kerr MP , et al. Managing anti‐epileptic drug treatment in adult patients with intellectual disability: a serious conundrum. Eur J Neurol. 2016;23(7):1152–1157. 10.1111/ene.13016 27106363
119 Bishop R , Laugharne R , Shaw N , Russell AM , Goodley D , Banerjee S , et al. The inclusion of adults with intellectual disabilities in health research ‐ challenges, barriers and opportunities: a mixed‐method study among stakeholders in England. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2024;68(2):140–149. 10.1111/jir.13097 37815212
120 Allard J , Henley W , Snoeijen‐Schouwenaars F , van Ool J , Tan I , Jurgen Schelhaas H , et al. European perspective of perampanel response in people with intellectual disability. Acta Neurol Scand. 2020;142(3):255–259. 10.1111/ane.13261 32383205
121 Allard J , Henley W , Mclean B , Sellers A , Hudson S , Rajakulendran S , et al. Lacosamide in the general population and in people with intellectual disability: similar responses? Seizure. 2020;76:161–166. 10.1016/j.seizure.2020.02.013 32106016 PMC7113834
122 Scheffer IE , French J , Valente KD , Auvin S , Cross JH , Specchio N . Operational definition of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies to underpin the design of therapeutic trials. Epilepsia. 2025;66(4):1014–1023. 10.1111/epi.18265 40013914 PMC11997937
123 Shankar R , Marston XL , Danielson V , Do Rego B , Lasagne R , Williams O , et al. Real‐world evidence of epidemiology, patient characteristics, and mortality in people with drug‐resistant epilepsy in the United Kingdom, 2011–2021. J Neurol. 2024;271(5):2473–2483. 10.1007/s00415-023-12165-4 38240828 PMC11055725
124 Perucca E , Gram L , Avanzini G , Dulac O . Antiepileptic drugs as a cause of worsening seizures. Epilepsia. 1998;39(1):5–17. 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1998.tb01268.x 9578007
125 Cohen SR , Helbig I , Kaufman MC , Schust Myers L , Conway L , Helbig KL . Caregiver assessment of quality of life in individuals with genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2022;64(8):957–964. 10.1111/dmcn.15187 35229292 PMC10305579
126 Scheffer IE , Berkovic S , Capovilla G , Connolly MB , French J , Guilhoto L , et al. ILAE classification of the epilepsies: position paper of the ILAE commission for classification and terminology. Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):512–521. 10.1111/epi.13709 28276062 PMC5386840
127 Raga S , Specchio N , Rheims S , Wilmshurst JM . Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: recognition and approaches to care. Epileptic Disord. 2021;23(1):40–52. 10.1684/epd.2021.1244 33632673
128 Witt JA , Elger CE , Helmstaedter C . Adverse cognitive effects of antiepileptic pharmacotherapy: each additional drug matters. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015;25(11):1954–1959. 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.07.027 26296280
129 Besag FMC , Vasey MJ . Neurocognitive effects of antiseizure medications in children and adolescents with epilepsy. Paediatr Drugs. 2021;23(3):253–286. 10.1007/s40272-021-00448-0 33956338
130 Eddy CM , Rickards HE , Cavanna AE . The cognitive impact of antiepileptic drugs. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2011;4(6):385–407. 10.1177/1756285611417920 22164192 PMC3229254
131 Park SP , Kwon SH . Cognitive effects of antiepileptic drugs. J Clin Neurol. 2008;4(3):99–106. 10.3988/jcn.2008.4.3.99 19513311 PMC2686875
132 Strzelczyk A , Schubert‐Bast S . Psychobehavioural and cognitive adverse events of anti‐seizure medications for the treatment of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. CNS Drugs. 2022;36(10):1079–1111. 10.1007/s40263-022-00955-9 36194365 PMC9531646
133 Ramantani G , Wirrell E . Epilepsy surgery in developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. Epilepsy Behav. 2024;159:109985. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2024.109985 39181112
134 Ma Y , Kaminski M , Kim A . Surgical treatment of epileptic encephalopathy with spike‐and‐wave activation in sleep: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Seizure. 2024;119:78–83. 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.05.008 38820673
135 Metternich B , Wagner K , Geiger MJ , Hirsch M , Schulze‐Bonhage A , Klotz KA . Cognitive and behavioral effects of cannabidiol in patients with treatment‐resistant epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2021;114(Pt A):107558. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2020.107558 33246899
136 Bishop KI , Isquith PK , Gioia GA , Knupp KG , Scheffer IE , Nabbout R , et al. Fenfluramine treatment is associated with improvement in everyday executive function in preschool‐aged children (<5 years) with Dravet syndrome: a critical period for early neurodevelopment. Epilepsy Behav. 2023;138:108994. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2022.108994 36463826
137 Hadady L , Klivényi P , Fabó D , Beniczky S . Real‐world user experience with seizure detection wearable devices in the home environment. Epilepsia. 2023;64(Suppl 4):S72–S77. 10.1111/epi.17189 35195898
138 Monté CPJA , Arends JBAM , Lazeron RHC , Tan IY , Boon PAJM . Update review on SUDEP: risk assessment, background & seizure detection devices. Epilepsy Behav. 2024;160:109966. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2024.109966 39383657
139 van Westrhenen A , Lazeron RHC , van Dijk JP , Leijten FSS , Thijs RD , Dutch TeleEpilepsy Consortium . Multimodal nocturnal seizure detection in children with epilepsy: a prospective, multicenter, long‐term, in‐home trial. Epilepsia. 2023;64(8):2137–2152. 10.1111/epi.17654 37195144
140 Beniczky S , Polster T , Kjaer TW , Hjalgrim H . Detection of generalized tonic‐clonic seizures by a wireless wrist accelerometer: a prospective, multicenter study. Epilepsia. 2013;54(4):e58–e61. 10.1111/epi.12120 23398578
141 Meritam P , Ryvlin P , Beniczky S . User‐based evaluation of applicability and usability of a wearable accelerometer device for detecting bilateral tonic‐clonic seizures: a field study. Epilepsia. 2018;59(Suppl 1):48–52. 10.1111/epi.14051 29873828
142 Onorati F , Regalia G , Caborni C , LaFrance WC , Blum AS , Bidwell J , et al. Prospective study of a multimodal convulsive seizure detection wearable system on pediatric and adult patients in the epilepsy monitoring unit. Front Neurol. 2021;12:724904. 10.3389/fneur.2021.724904 34489858 PMC8418082
143 Beniczky S , Conradsen I , Henning O , Fabricius M , Wolf P . Automated real‐time detection of tonic‐clonic seizures using a wearable EMG device. Neurology. 2018;90(5):e428–e434. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004893 29305441 PMC5791791
144 Milne‐Ives M , Duun‐Henriksen J , Blaabjerg L , Mclean B , Shankar R , Meinert E . At home EEG monitoring technologies for people with epilepsy and intellectual disabilities: a scoping review. Seizure. 2023;110:11–20. 10.1016/j.seizure.2023.05.007 37295277
145 Halliday AJ , Gillinder L , Lai A , Seneviratne U , Fontenot H , Cameron T , et al. The UMPIRE study: a first‐in‐human multicenter trial of bilateral subscalp monitoring for epileptic seizure detection. Epilepsia. 2025;66(9):3426–3439. 10.1111/epi.18458 40445205 PMC12455381
146 Lennard S , Newman R , McLean B , Jory C , Cox D , Young C , et al. Improving nocturnal event monitoring in people with intellectual disability in community using an artificial intelligence camera. Epilepsy Behav Rep. 2023;22:100603. 10.1016/j.ebr.2023.100603 37152695 PMC10160340
147 Kienitz R , Kay L , Beuchat I , Gelhard S , von Brauchitsch S , Mann C , et al. Benzodiazepines in the management of seizures and status epilepticus: a review of routes of delivery, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and tolerability. CNS Drugs. 2022;36(9):951–975. 10.1007/s40263-022-00940-2 35971024 PMC9477921
148 McBride A , Watkins L , Tromans S , Triantafyllopoulou P , Basset P , Tittensor P , et al. The current clinical practice and experiences in buccal midazolam prescribing in community for status epilepticus termination in the United Kingdom: the rescue epilepsy medication and training (REMIT) study. Seizure. 2025;125:62–72. 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.12.022 39809115
149 Epilepsy Nurses Association . Interim best practice guidelines for training professional carers in the administration of buccal (oromucosal) midazolam for the treatment of prolonged and/or clusters of epileptic seizures in the community. 2023. Available from: https://esna‐online.org/wp‐content/uploads/2024/01/Midazolam‐interim‐guidelines‐MI_12454014_21.12.23_V_3.pdf. Accessed 3 Jul 2025.
150 Tittensor P , Tittensor S , Chisanga E , Bagary M , Jory C , Shankar R . UK framework for basic epilepsy training and oromucosal midazolam administration. Epilepsy Behav. 2021;122:108180. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2021.108180 34252835
151 Epilepsy Society . Emergency medication. Available from: https://epilepsysociety.org.uk/about‐epilepsy/medication‐epilepsy/emergency‐medication. Accessed 6 Feb 2026.
152 Kwan P , Arzimanoglou A , Berg AT , Brodie MJ , Allen Hauser W , Mathern G , et al. Definition of drug resistant epilepsy: consensus proposal by the ad hoc task force of the ILAE commission on therapeutic strategies. Epilepsia. 2010;51(6):1069–1077. 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02397.x 19889013
153 Crutcher R , Horvat D , Lehman N , Ma Y . Outcome and predictors of response to vagus nerve stimulation for drug‐resistant epilepsy: a retrospective cohort study. Neurosurg Rev. 2025;48(1):676. 10.1007/s10143-025-03839-w 41042470 PMC12494630
154 D'Onofrio G , Villano G , Dell'isola G , Verrotti A , Striano P . Neuromodulation as a treatment strategy in Lennox‐Gastaut syndrome: evidence and future directions. Expert Rev Neurother. 2025;25(5):501–504. 10.1080/14737175.2025.2474560 40021489
155 Chen D , Zhu L , Liu L , Zhou D , Wu X . Dynamic changes in comorbid conditions following vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy. Acta Epileptol. 2025;7(1):33. 10.1186/s42494-025-00222-6 40448234 PMC12123979
156 Malmgren K , Olsson I , Engman E , Flink R , Rydenhag B . Seizure outcome after resective epilepsy surgery in patients with low IQ. Brain. 2008;131(Pt 2):535–542. 10.1093/brain/awm296 18063587
157 Langenbruch L , Kellinghaus C . Epilepsy surgery in people with intellectual disability—English version. Z Epileptol. 2022;35(S2):113–116. 10.1007/s10309-022-00527-3
158 Duncan JS , Winston GP , Koepp MJ , Ourselin S . Brain imaging in the assessment for epilepsy surgery. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15(4):420–433. 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00383-X 26925532 PMC6736670
159 Peter‐Derex L , Klimes P , Latreille V , Bouhadoun S , Dubeau F , Frauscher B . Sleep disruption in epilepsy: ictal and interictal epileptic activity matter. Ann Neurol. 2020;88(5):907–920. 10.1002/ana.25884 32833279
160 Badawy RAB , Curatolo JM , Newton M , Berkovic SF , Macdonell RAL . Sleep deprivation increases cortical excitability in epilepsy: syndrome‐specific effects. Neurology. 2006;67(6):1018–1022. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000237392.64230.f7 17000971
161 Krutoshinskaya Y , Coulehan K , Pushchinska G , Spiegel R . The reciprocal relationship between sleep and epilepsy. J Pers Med. 2024;14(1):118. 10.3390/jpm14010118 38276240 PMC10817641
162 Liguori C , Toledo M , Kothare S . Effects of anti‐seizure medications on sleep architecture and daytime sleepiness in patients with epilepsy: a literature review. Sleep Med Rev. 2021;60:101559. 10.1016/j.smrv.2021.101559 34710770
163 Christian CA , Reddy DS , Maguire J , Forcelli PA . Sex differences in the epilepsies and associated comorbidities: implications for use and development of pharmacotherapies. Pharmacol Rev. 2020;72(4):767–800. 10.1124/pr.119.017392 32817274 PMC7495340
164 Medina‐Rico M , López‐Ramos H , Quiñonez A . Sexuality in people with intellectual disability: review of literature. Sex Disabil. 2018;36(3):231–248. 10.1007/s11195-017-9508-6
165 Löfgren E , Mikkonen K , Tolonen U , Pakarinen A , Koivunen R , Myllyla VV , et al. Reproductive endocrine function in women with epilepsy: the role of epilepsy type and medication. Epilepsy Behav. 2007;10(1):77–83. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2006.09.011 17098479
166 Reddy DS . The role of neurosteroids in the pathophysiology and treatment of catamenial epilepsy. Epilepsy Res. 2009;85(1):1–30. 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2009.02.017 19406620 PMC2696558
167 Tracy J , Grover S , Macgibbon S . Menstrual issues for women with intellectual disability. Aust Prescr. 2016;39(2):54–57. 10.18773/austprescr.2016.024 27340323 PMC4917628
168 Mitchell L , Vellanki B , Tang L , Hunter K , Finnegan A , Swartz JJ , et al. Contraceptive provision to women with intellectual and developmental disabilities enrolled in Medicaid. Obstet Gynecol. 2023;142(6):1477–1485. 10.1097/AOG.0000000000005421 38051293 PMC10642699
169 Kirkpatrick L , Collins A , Harrison E , Miller E , Patterson C , Sogawa Y , et al. Pediatric neurologists' perspectives on sexual and reproductive health care for adolescent and young adult women with epilepsy and intellectual disability. J Child Neurol. 2022;37(1):56–63. 10.1177/08830738211041824 34657501
170 Morrell MJ , Flynn KL , Seale CG , Done S , Paulson AJ , Flaster ER , et al. Reproductive dysfunction in women with epilepsy: antiepileptic drug effects on sex‐steroid hormones. CNS Spectr. 2001;6(9):771–772; 783–786. 10.1017/s1092852900001528 15492730
171 Li S , Zhang L , Wei N , Tai Z , Yu C , Xu Z . Research progress on the effect of epilepsy and antiseizure medications on PCOS through HPO axis. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021;12:787854. 10.3389/fendo.2021.787854 34992582 PMC8726549
172 Tallon E , O'Donovan L , Delanty N . Reversible male infertility with valproate use: a review of the literature. Epilepsy Behav Rep. 2021;16:100446. 10.1016/j.ebr.2021.100446 34027381 PMC8127004
173 Mbizvo GK , Duncan SE , Nancarrow L , Sagarino T , Watkins LV , Mbizvo MT , et al. A retrospective cohort study of valproate and infertility in men with epilepsy or bipolar disorder using international health data. Nat Commun. 2025;16(1):8221. 10.1038/s41467-025-63469-0 40954165 PMC12436621
174 McGuire BE , Bayley AA . Relationships, sexuality and decision‐making capacity in people with an intellectual disability. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2011;24(5):398–402. 10.1097/YCO.0b013e328349bbcb 21778882
175 Li J , Toffa DH , Nguyen DK . Epilepsy and pregnancy: an audit of specialized care. Can J Neurol Sci. 2022;49(5):678–687. 10.1017/cjn.2021.190 34353406
176 Stephen LJ , Harden C , Tomson T , Brodie MJ . Management of epilepsy in women. Lancet Neurol. 2019;18(5):481–491. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30495-2 30857949
177 Greenwood NW , Wilkinson J . Sexual and reproductive health care for women with intellectual disabilities: a primary care perspective. Int J Family Med. 2013;2013:642472. 10.1155/2013/642472 24455249 PMC3876698
178 Höglund B , Lindgren P , Larsson M . Pregnancy and birth outcomes of women with intellectual disability in Sweden: a national register study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2012;91(12):1381–1387. 10.1111/j.1600-0412.2012.01509.x 22881406 PMC3549474
179 Palsson OS , Whitehead WE , van Tilburg MAL , Chang L , Chey W , Crowell MD , et al. Rome IV diagnostic questionnaires and tables for investigators and clinicians. Gastroenterology. 2016;150:1481–1491. 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.02.014 27144634
180 Riva A , Sahin E , Volpedo G , Petretto A , Lavarello C , Di Sapia R , et al. Identification of an epilepsy‐linked gut microbiota signature in a pediatric rat model of acquired epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 2024;194:106469. 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106469 38485093
181 Olson CA , Vuong HE , Yano JM , Liang QY , Nusbaum DJ , Hsiao EY . The gut microbiota mediates the anti‐seizure effects of the ketogenic diet. Cell. 2018;173(7):1728–1741.e13. 10.1016/j.cell.2018.04.027 29804833 PMC6003870
182 Ding M , Lang Y , Shu H , Shao J , Cui L . Microbiota‐gut‐brain Axis and epilepsy: a review on mechanisms and potential therapeutics. Front Immunol. 2021;12:742449. 10.3389/fimmu.2021.742449 34707612 PMC8542678
183 De Caro C , Leo A , Nesci V , Ghelardini C , di Cesare ML , Striano P , et al. Intestinal inflammation increases convulsant activity and reduces antiepileptic drug efficacy in a mouse model of epilepsy. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):13983. 10.1038/s41598-019-50542-0 31562378 PMC6764994
184 Nursing Times . Improving bowel management in adults with intellectual disability. 2024. Available from: https://www.nursingtimes.net/bladder‐and‐bowel/improving‐bowel‐management‐in‐adults‐with‐intellectual‐disability‐15‐04‐2024/. Accessed 12 Jun 2025.
185 Reid SM , Westbury C , Guzys AT , Reddihough DS . Anticholinergic medications for reducing drooling in children with developmental disability. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2020;62(3):346–353. 10.1111/dmcn.14350 31495925
186 Jost WH , Bäumer T , Laskawi R , Slawek J , Spittau B , Steffen A , et al. Therapy of sialorrhea with botulinum neurotoxin. Neurol Ther. 2019;8(2):273–288. 10.1007/s40120-019-00155-6 31542879 PMC6858891
187 Jory C , Shankar R , Oak K , Oates J , Wilcock M . Going down the tubes! Impact on seizure control of antiepileptic medication given via percutaneous feeding tubes. Epilepsy Behav. 2017;74:114–118. 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.06.024 28732254
188 Johannessen Landmark C , Eyal S , Burns ML , Franco V , Johannessen SI . Pharmacological aspects of antiseizure medications: from basic mechanisms to clinical considerations of drug interactions and use of therapeutic drug monitoring. Epileptic Disord. 2023;25(4):454–471. 10.1002/epd2.20069 37259844
189 Olivotto S , Duse A , Bova SM , Leonardi V , Biganzoli E , Milanese A , et al. Glut1 deficiency syndrome throughout life: clinical phenotypes, intelligence, life achievements and quality of life in familial cases. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022;17(1):365. 10.1186/s13023-022-02513-4 36153584 PMC9509642
190 Gavrilovici C , Rho JM . Metabolic epilepsies amenable to ketogenic therapies: indications, contraindications, and underlying mechanisms. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021;44(1):42–53. 10.1002/jimd.12283 32654164
191 Tokatly Latzer I , Pearl PL . Inherited metabolic epilepsies‐established diseases, new approaches. Epilepsia Open. 2024;00:1–15. 10.1002/epi4.13121 PMC13393518 39729084
192 Zhang MJ , Wu D , Yu LF , Li H , Sun D , Liang JM , et al. Diagnosis and treatment recommendations for glucose transporter 1 deficiency syndrome. World J Pediatr. 2025;21(2):149–158. 10.1007/s12519-024-00864-5 39745620 PMC11885374
193 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence . Epilepsies in children, young people and adults: diagnosis and management—[12] Evidence review: Ketogenic diets for drug‐resistant epilepsy. 2022. Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng217/evidence/12‐ketogenic‐diets‐for‐drugresistant‐epilepsy‐pdf‐398366282775. Accessed 26 Nov 2025.37099654
194 Martin‐McGill KJ , Bresnahan R , Levy RG , Cooper PN . Ketogenic diets for drug‐resistant epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;6(6):CD001903. 10.1002/14651858.CD001903.pub5 32588435 PMC7387249
195 Schoeler NE , Cross JH . Ketogenic dietary therapies in adults with epilepsy: a practical guide. Pract Neurol. 2016;16(3):208–214. 10.1136/practneurol-2015-001288 26908897
196 Borowicz‐Reutt K , Krawczyk M , Czernia J . Ketogenic diet in the treatment of epilepsy. Nutrients. 2024;16(9):1258. 10.3390/nu16091258 38732505 PMC11085120
197 Dyńka D , Kowalcze K , Paziewska A . The role of ketogenic diet in the treatment of neurological diseases. Nutrients. 2022;14(23):5003. 10.3390/nu14235003 36501033 PMC9739023
198 Stone‐Heaberlin M , Merrill A , Fodstad JC . Feeding problems and assessment in individuals with intellectual disability. In: Matson J , editor. Handbook of dual diagnosis. Autism and child psychopathology series. Cham: Springer; 2020. p. 357–365. 10.1007/978-3-030-46835-4_22
199 Cooper SA , McLean G , Guthrie B , McConnachie A , Mercer S , Sullivan F , et al. Multiple physical and mental health comorbidity in adults with intellectual disabilities: population‐based cross‐sectional analysis. BMC Fam Pract. 2015;16:110. 10.1186/s12875-015-0329-3 26310664 PMC4551707
200 Cervenka MC , Wood S , Bagary M , Balabanov A , Bercovici E , Brown MG , et al. International recommendations for the management of adults treated with ketogenic diet therapies. Neurol Clin Pract. 2021;11(5):385–397. 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001007 34840865 PMC8610544
201 De Giorgis V , Tagliabue A , Bisulli F , Brambilla I , Camerini A , Cusmai R , et al. Ketogenic dietary therapies in epilepsy: recommendations of the Italian league against epilepsy dietary therapy study group. Front Neurol. 2023;14:1215618. 10.3389/fneur.2023.1215618 37497012 PMC10368245
202 Top KA , Brna P , Ye L , Smith B . Risk of seizures after immunization in children with epilepsy: a risk interval analysis. BMC Pediatr. 2018;18(1):134. 10.1186/s12887-018-1112-0 29642863 PMC5896155
203 Top KA , Righolt CH , Hawken S , Donelle J , Pabla G , Brna P , et al. Adverse events following immunization among children with epilepsy: a self‐controlled case series. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2020;39(5):454–459. 10.1097/INF.0000000000002553 32301921
204 von Spiczak S , Helbig I , Drechsel‐Baeuerle U , Muhle H , van Baalen A , van Kempen MJ , et al. A retrospective population‐based study on seizures related to childhood vaccination. Epilepsia. 2011;52(8):1506–1512. 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03134.x 21692791
205 Verbeek NE , van der Maas NAT , Sonsma ACM , Ippel E , Vermeer‐de Bondt PE , Hagebeuk E , et al. Effect of vaccinations on seizure risk and disease course in Dravet syndrome. Neurology. 2015;85(7):596–603. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001855 26203087
206 Craiu D , Rener Primec Z , Lagae L , Vigevano F , Trinka E , Specchio N , et al. Vaccination and childhood epilepsies. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2022;36:57–68. 10.1016/j.ejpn.2021.11.014 34922162
207 Wirrell EC , Laux L , Donner E , Jette N , Knupp K , Meskis MA , et al. Optimizing the diagnosis and management of Dravet syndrome: recommendations from a North American consensus panel. Pediatr Neurol. 2017;68:18–34.e3. 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2017.01.025 28284397
208 Riva A , Coppola A , Bisulli F , Verrotti A , Bagnasco I , Elia M , et al. Italian report on RARE epilepsies (i‐RARE): a consensus on multidisciplinarity. Epilepsia Open. 2024;9(5):1857–1867. 10.1002/epi4.13020 39176980 PMC11450651
209 Mei D , Balestrini S , Parrini E , Gambardella A , Annesi G , De Giorgis V , et al. National survey on the prevalence of single‐gene aetiologies for genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies in Italy. J Med Genet. 2024;62(1):25–31. 10.1136/jmg-2024-110328 39613335 PMC11877070
210 Zablotsky B , Ng AE , Black LI , Blumberg SJ . Diagnosed developmental disabilities in children aged 3‐17 years: United States, 2019–2021. NCHS Data Brief. 2023;473:1–8.37440277
211 Lersch R , Jannadi R , Grosse L , Wagner M , Schneider MF , von Stülpnagel C , et al. Targeted molecular strategies for genetic neurodevelopmental disorders: emerging lessons from Dravet syndrome. Neuroscientist. 2023;29(6):732–750. 10.1177/10738584221088244 35414300 PMC10623613
212 Mullan KA , Anderson A , Shi YW , Ding JH , Ng CC , Chen Z , et al. Potential role of regulatory DNA variants in modifying the risk of severe cutaneous reactions induced by aromatic anti‐seizure medications. Epilepsia. 2022;63(4):936–949. 10.1111/epi.17182 35170024 PMC9541367
213 D'Onofrio G , Santangelo A , Riva A , Striano P . Genetic polymorphisms of drug‐metabolizing enzymes in older and newer anti‐seizure medications. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2024;20(6):407–410. 10.1080/17425255.2024.2362190 38809019
214 Riva A , Roberti R , D'Onofrio G , Vari MS , Amadori E , De Giorgis V , et al. A real‐life pilot study of the clinical application of pharmacogenomics testing on saliva in epilepsy. Epilepsia Open. 2023;8(3):1142–1150. 10.1002/epi4.12717 36840436 PMC10472391
215 Riva A , Golda A , Balagura G , Amadori E , Vari MS , Piccolo G , et al. New trends and most promising therapeutic strategies for epilepsy treatment. Front Neurol. 2021;12:753753. 10.3389/fneur.2021.753753 34950099 PMC8690245
216 Thiele EA , Marsh ED , French JA , Mazurkiewicz‐Beldzinska M , Benbadis SR , Joshi C , et al. Cannabidiol in patients with seizures associated with Lennox‐Gastaut syndrome (GWPCARE4): a randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2018;391(10125):1085–1096. 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30136-3 29395273
217 Devinsky O , Patel AD , Cross JH , Villanueva V , Wirrell EC , Privitera M , et al. Effect of cannabidiol on drop seizures in the Lennox–Gastaut syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2018;378(20):1888–1897. 10.1056/nejmoa1714631 29768152
218 Devinsky O , Cross JH , Laux L , Marsh E , Miller I , Nabbout R , et al. Trial of cannabidiol for drug‐resistant seizures in the Dravet syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(21):2011–2020. 10.1056/nejmoa1611618 28538134
219 Miller I , Scheffer IE , Gunning B , Sanchez‐Carpintero R , Gil‐Nagel A , Perry MS , et al. Dose‐ranging effect of adjunctive oral cannabidiol vs placebo on convulsive seizure frequency in Dravet syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 2020;77(5):613–621. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.0073 32119035 PMC7052786
220 Frampton JE . Fenfluramine: a review in Dravet and Lennox‐Gastaut syndromes. Drugs. 2023;83(10):923–934. 10.1007/s40265-023-01881-w 37316680 PMC10310619
221 Guerrini R , Chancharme L , Serraz B , Chiron C . Additional results from two randomized, placebo‐controlled trials of stiripentol in Dravet syndrome highlight a rapid antiseizure efficacy with longer seizure‐free periods. Neurol Ther. 2024;13(3):869–884. 10.1007/s40120-024-00623-8 38722572 PMC11136916
222 Thiele EA , Bebin EM , Bhathal H , Jansen FE , Kotulska K , Lawson JA , et al. Add‐on cannabidiol treatment for drug‐resistant seizures in tuberous sclerosis complex: a placebo‐controlled randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 2021;78(3):285–292. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.4607 33346789 PMC7754080
223 French JA , Lawson JA , Yapici Z , Ikeda H , Polster T , Nabbout R , et al. Adjunctive everolimus therapy for treatment‐resistant focal‐onset seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis (EXIST‐3): a phase 3, randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled study. Lancet. 2016;388(10056):2153–2163. 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31419-2 27613521
224 Coppola A . Understanding developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. EMJ Neurol. 2024;12(Suppl 3):2–7. 10.33590/emjneurol/10309291
225 Auvin S , Bissler JJ , Cottin V , Fujimoto A , Hofbauer GFL , Jansen AC , et al. A step‐wise approach for establishing a multidisciplinary team for the management of tuberous sclerosis complex: a Delphi consensus report. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019;14(1):91. 10.1186/s13023-019-1072-y 31039793 PMC6492321
