
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Alzheimers Dement
Journal ID: Alzheimers Dement
NLM Journal ID: 101231978
Journal ID: ALZ

Alzheimer's & Dementia

ISSN: 1552-5260
EISSN: 1552-5279
Publisher: Wiley

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13498905
PMID: 42630074
DOI: 10.1002/alz.71778
Article ID: ALZ71778
Article version: 1
Subjects: Research Article, Research Article

Aberrant ɑSMA expression reveals broad mossy fiber reorganization integrating with tangle and plaque formation and mitoenergetic alteration in the human hippocampus

TU et al.

Tu Tian 1
Zhang Qi‐Lei 1
Sun Zhong‐Ping 1
Kang Chao 1
Li Dan 1
Huo Xin‐Hua 2
Zhang Xiao‐Jie 3
Zhang Yan 3
Cui Mengchao 4
Pan Aihua 1
Wang Jian 2 205106@csu.edu.cn

Yan Xiao‐Xin 1 xiaoxinyan0731@163.com

1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Central South University, Xiangya School of Basic Medical Sciences Changsha China
2 The Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering Institute Central South University, Xiangya School of Basic Medical Sciences Changsha China
3 Department of Psychiatry, National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders, and National Center for Mental Disorders The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University Changsha China
4 Key Laboratory of Radiopharmaceuticals Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University Beijing China
* Correspondence
Xiao‐Xin Yan, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Central South University, Xiangya School of Basic Medical Sciences, #172 Tong‐Zi Po Road, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China.
Email: xiaoxinyan0731@163.com
Jian Wang, The Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering Institute, Central South University, Xiangya School of Basic Medical Sciences, Changsha, #172 Tong‐Zi Po Road, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China.
Email: 205106@csu.edu.cn

Electronic publication date: 2026 Aug 22
Publication date: 2026 Aug
Volume: 22
Issue: 8
Electronic Location ID: e71778
Revised 2026 Jul 6; Received 2026 Apr 30; Accepted 2026 Jul 23
Copyright: © 2026 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.
License: This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: amyloid beta 42/40 ratio, axonal sprouting, neuronal death, synaptic pathology, trisynaptic circuit

Funding: Ministry of Science and Technology of China #2021ZD0201103 #2021ZD02018 National Natural Science Foundation of China 10.13039/501100001809 #82201595
Figure count: 8
Table count: 0
Page count: 21

source-schema-version-number: 2.0
cover-date: August 2026
details-of-publishers-convertor: Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.8.6 mode:remove_FC converted:22.08.2026

==============================
Abstract

INTRODUCTION

Neural network and bioenergetic abnormalities occur with Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis.

METHODS

We explored mossy fiber (MF) and mitoenergetic alteration using ɑ‐smooth muscle actin (ɑSMA) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) immunolabeling in human hippocampus relative to tangle and plaque formation by referring to Braak (0–VI) and Thal (0–5) staging scores.

RESULTS

In the brain group with Braak/Thal 0/0 scores (control), ɑSMA labeling occurred in CA3 and dentate gyrus. In groups with 1a to IV/0 and II to VI/1 to 5 scores, ɑSMA labeling appeared in CA2 to subiculum, with increased density in these and the dentate subregions. ɑSMA‐labeled MF terminals infiltrated into ghost tangles co‐expressing amyloidogenic markers and coexisted among β‐secreatse‐1 labeled neurites and amyloid beta plaques. COX immunolabeling was increased in CA2 to subiculum in the groups with 1a to IV/0 to 1 compared to 0/0.

DISCUSSION

MF reorganization/dystrophy develops and integrates with tangle and plaque formation and mitoenergetic alteration in the human hippocampus.

Highlights

ɑ‐smooth muscle actin (ɑSMA)–labeled mossy fiber (MF) terminals were restricted to CA3 and dentate hilus in control human brains.

Neuropil/neuritic ɑSMA labeling appeared in CA2 to subiculum in brains with primary age‐related tauopathy (PART) and Alzheimer's disease neuropathological change (ADNC), with increased density in these and the dentate subregions.

ɑSMA‐labeled swollen neurites infiltrated into ghost tangles and co‐expressed amyloidogenic markers in PART brains.

ɑSMA‐labeled swollen neurites occurred among subsets of β‐secretase 1–labeled neuritic clusters and amyloid beta plaques.

Cytochrome c oxidase immunolabeling was increased in CA2 to subiculum in brains with PART and early ADNC.

1 BACKGROUND

The hippocampus is a region in the human brain that may be well suited to address several important pathogenic issues of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Impairments of short‐term memory and perception of time and place are early warning signs of AD. The trisynaptic circuit plays a key role for these functions; 1 , 2 the extent to which this network is affected during AD pathogenesis deserves in‐depth investigation. Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques are the principal AD neuropathological changes (ADNC) that develop with differential spatiotemporal trajectories in the hippocampus and other limbic structures relative to cerebral neocortical regions in reference to the age spectrum. 3 , 4 Thus, primary age‐related tauopathy (PART) refers to the presence of limbic tangle lesions in the absence of Aβ plaques in the entire brain. 5 , 6 Overwhelmingly coexisting with limbic NFTs, Aβ plaques appear first in the neocortex as Thal phase 1 and next in the hippocampus as phase 2. 4 Therefore, the hippocampus may allow a study into the early interplay between tau and Aβ or tangle and plaque formation.

Seizures appear to be common among AD patients relative to the general elderly population, with the lifetime prevalences reported among studies being variable. 7 , 8 This might relate to the patient profiles between studies but also to the issue of seizure detection. AD‐related epileptiform activities are generally non‐convulsive and may be neglected by the patients and caregivers. 9 The epileptic spike waves often occur during sleep and need continuous overnight recording to be detected. These waves appear to emerge around the lateral temporal lobe regions or spread from the mesial temporal lobe to the cerebral surface, thereby exhibiting some similarity to the epileptic spikes in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE). 7 Also, as with MTLE, AD‐related silent seizures can be better detected with electroencephalography via foramen ovale electrodes. 10 , 11 Potentially relevant to the epileptiform phenotype, hippocampal hyperactivity has been considered an early neuroimaging sign of AD. 12 , 13 , 14 This imaging change can occur in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 15 , 16 and individuals at risk for developing AD. 17 , 18 , 19 Studies also show that hippocampal hyperactivity is associated with tauopathy in preclinical AD, MCI, or mild AD‐type dementia. 12 , 20 The issues of epilepsy comorbidity and hippocampal hyperactivity have attracted growing attention in the biomarker and drug development frontiers of AD. 21 , 22 , 23 However, it remains elusive as to whether there exist neural network and cellular metabolic substrates for these manifestations.

Several years ago, we observed a distinct immunolabeling of alpha‐smooth muscle actin (ɑSMA) at the hippocampal mossy fiber (MF) terminals in the dentate hilus and CA3 in human brains without tangle and plaque lesions. We also noticed a de novo neuropil/neuritic ɑSMA labeling in CA2 to subiculum in brains with PART and ADNC. However, the expression of a typical vascular smooth cell marker in neuronal element was unprecedented, while aberrant MF innervation was best known to reorganize neuronal circuits within the dentate gyrus (DG) under pathological conditions, as well established in MTLE. With vigorous cross‐validation including examination of αSMA immunolabeling in the brain, periphery, and neuronal cultures, and confirmation of the antibody specificity with the small interfering RNA silencing method, we demonstrated in the first study that MF expression of ɑSMA in the human hippocampus is a phenomenon related to brain evolution and neuronal development. 24 In the second study we showed that ɑSMA expression can occur aberrantly in CA2, CA1, and subiculum in resected human hippocampi with epileptic sclerosis. 25 Specifically, a de novo band‐like ɑSMA labeling extended from CA2, to CA1 and further to the subiculum in the resected hippocampi. Cross‐validation experiments indicated that the overall β‐secretase 1 (BACE1) and zinc transporter 3 (ZnT3) immunolabeling were greatly reduced over the above subregions with extensive neuronal/synaptic loss, but a band‐like structure remained in a manner in congruence with the aberrant αSMA labeling pattern. We further detected an enhanced cytochrome c oxidase (COX) expression by immunohistochemistry in the inner molecular layer (iML) and subiculum in the epileptic hippocampus. 25 On the basis of the above work, the present study extends to a further characterization of aberrant MF ɑSMA labeling pattern and COX alteration in the post mortem human hippocampus relative to the development of tangle and plaque pathologies.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT

Systematic review: A literature search was performed using PubMed and other internet platforms. ɑ‐smooth muscle actin (ɑSMA) expression in mossy fibers (MFs) was characterized in the human hippocampus by our group, with its labeling of putative long‐range MF sprouting observed in resected hippocampi from patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE). The hippocampus is affected early and severely in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and may be suited to explore AD pathogenic issues, such as trisynaptic circuit integrity, tangle/plaque interplay, epilepsy comorbidity, and early‐onset hyperactivity in this region.

Interpretation: Early‐onset and extensive MF reorganization appear to occur in the human hippocampus with primary age‐related tauopathy (PART) and AD neuropathological change (ADNC). The aberrant MF terminals can form dystrophic neurites co‐expressing amyloidogenic markers at ghost tangles in PART brains, and they coexist among subsets of β‐secretase 1–labeled neuritic clusters and amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques in ADNC brans. Enhanced cytochrome c labeling suggestive of putative mitochondrial bioenergetic upregulation appears to exist in CA2 to subiculum in brains with PART and early ADNC.

Future directions: It appears that ghost tangles in the hippocampus can provoke axonal, dendritic, and glial responses, including the formation of amyloidogenic presynaptic dystrophic neurites originating from distant anatomical sites. Future studies are needed to explore whether this effect can occur in the neocortex and other brain regions along with tau propagation and whether Aβ plaques can prompt sprouting/dystrophy of phosphorylated tau–bearing neurites. Opportunities are needed to explore the ectopic ɑSMA expression in the human hippocampus at the electron microscopic level. Previous EM studies indicated that the sprouting MF terminals are enriched of mitochondria and form aberrant excitatory synaptic circuits in the dentate gyrus in MTLE. It remains to be explored whether the spreading neuropil ɑSMA expression in CA2 to subiculum in PART and ADNC brains may link to the formation of aberrant synaptic connection.

2 METHODS

2.1 Post mortem human brains and sample preparation

The current post mortem human brain study was approved (2020KT‐37, 4/10/2020; #2023‐KT084, 6/21/2023) by the ethics committee of Central South University Xiangya School of Basic Medical Sciences following the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki). Brains were banked through a willed body donation program established under government and legislative regulations, 26 with donors’ clinical records prior to and/or during the last hospitalization obtained whenever available. Brains were collected and prepared according to the Standard Brain Banking Protocol provided by the China Brain Bank Consortium, 27 with hemibrains preserved fresh‐frozen at −70°C (for future biochemical studies) and immersed in formalin for 2 to 3 weeks. The fixed half‐brains were sliced frontally at a thickness of 1 cm and subsequently blocked to prepare cryostat (35 µm thick) and paraffin (3–4 µm thick) sections. Brains were routinely examined for AD and Parkinson disease neuropathologies using a set of antibodies recommended by the China Brain Bank Consortium, including the AT8 antibody for tau pathology, the 6E10 antibody for Aβ deposition, and silver stains (Bielschowsky and Gallyas) for NFTs and neuritic plaques (NPs). Braak stages of NFTs, Thal phases of Aβ plaques, and National Institute on Aging “ABC” (Aβ, NFT, and NP assessments) scores were assessed according to established references. 3 , 4 , 28 , 29 Zero scores were assigned for the brains that did not exhibit microscopically detectable NFTs and extracellular Aβ plaques. According to the original reference defining PART, 5 “definite PART” refers to the presence of NFTs with Braak stage ≤ IV in the absence of cerebral Aβ plaques, while “possible PART” is used to describe cases with NFTs but also some low load of Aβ (e.g., Thal phases 1–2). For simplicity, the PART brains in this study included only the definite PART cases. 6 We adapted the term ADNC to allocate the brains that had both tangle and plaque lesions. 6 , 30 Thus, the control group consisted of brains with Braak stage 0 and Thal phase 0 scores (n = 39; age range: 43–82 years, mean = 59 ± 10, median = 57; male [M]/female [F] = 31/8). The PART group 1 included brains with Braak stage 1a to II and Thal phase 0 scores (n = 33; age range: 46–96 years, mean = 69 ± 11, median = 68; M/F = 25/8). The PART group 2 had Braak stages III/IV and Thal phase 0 scores (n = 22; age range: 66–99 years, mean = 84 ± 9, median = 85; M/F = 12/10). The ADNC group 1 had Aβ plaques in the neocortex only (Thal phase 1) with NFTs at Braak stages II to IV (n = 43; age range: 66–99 years; mean = 84 ± 9, median = 86; M/F = 30/13). The ADNC group 2 had hippocampal plaques (Thal phases 2–5) with NFTs from Braak stages II to VI (n = 38; age range: 70–98; mean = 86 ± 8, median = 88; M/F = 21/17; Table S1 in supporting information). Brains with synucleinopathies, stroke, or traumatic infarction were not used in this study. 31

2.2 Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence

Cryostat temporal lobe sections at the mid‐hippocampus levels (2–3 sections/brain, with an interval of ≈ 1 cm) were used to assess αSMA and COX labeling relative to tangle and plaque lesions by Braak and Thal staging scores. Consecutive sections from a set of brains (n = 5–10) were stained systematically in a batch‐processing manner with the avidin‐biotin complex (ABC) method using the following antibodies: (1) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 against anti‐Aβ1–16, (2) mouse antibody AT8 against paired helical filaments from human brain, (3) rabbit anti‐ɑSMA, and (4) rabbit anti‐COX (Table S2 in supporting information), with the staining protocols detailed elsewhere. 24 , 32 The immunoreaction product was visualized with 0.05% diaminobenzidine (DAB) and 0.003% H2O2 after incubations with the pan‐specific secondary antibody (biotinylated horse anti‐mouse, rabbit, and goat immunoglobulin Gs, 1:400, Vector Laboratories) and the ABC reagents (1:200, Vector Laboratories).

Consecutive paraffin sections from brains with defined neuropathological stages/patterns were used for correlative cross‐examination by means of immunohistochemistry, double and triple fluorescent labeling, and silver stains. The sections were dewaxed, rehydrated, and rinsed in phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS, pH7.3). Antigen retrieval in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer (1 mM, pH 8.0) at 95°C for 10 minutes was performed before immunolabeling, with formic acid pretreatment applied to immunolabeling with Aβ antibodies. However, in several specifically designed experiments, formic treated and untreated sections were processed in parallel to evaluate the labeling pattern of Aβ antibodies and binding tracers. For double immunofluorescence, a combination of the Alexa Fluor 488 and Alexa Fluor 594 conjugated donkey secondary antibodies (1:100, Invitrogen) was applied to visualize the labeling when the primary antibodies were from different species. For double immunofluorescence with same‐species primary antibodies, the tyramide (TYR) signal amplification (TSA) method was used, with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody and TYR‐488 fluorophore (B40912, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and TYR‐594 fluorophore (B40915, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as detecting reagents. In this case, the binding of the first antibody was eliminated by heating (100°C, 25 minutes, in PBS), allowing a second round of primary antibody binding and TYR‐fluorescent visualization. The sections were counterstained with 4',6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole (DAPI) or fluorescent tracers for amyloid or tangle (see below). A brief Sudan black (0.1%) incubation was used to block autofluorescence before mounting the sections with an anti‐fading medium.

2.3 Histological staining of tangles and plaques

Three fluorescent tracers were used to visualize amyloid and tangle lesions. Amylo‐Glo is a bright‐blue dye containing styrylbenzene similar to Thioflavin S/T and can stain amyloid deposits as well as mature and ghost tangles. 33 The staining was carried out with a ready‐to‐use kit according to manufacturer's instruction (Cat#TR‐300‐AG, Biosensis Pty Ltd. SA5031). DANIR 8c is a potent and selective red fluorescence probe for Aβ imaging. 34 TNIR7‐1A is a near‐infrared probe detecting NFTs. 35 These tracers were used in settings of double (Amylo‐Glo and two primary antibodies) and single (DANIR 8c or TNIR7‐1A with one primary antibody) antibody immunofluorescence. Briefly, after immunolabeling, the sections were counterstained with Amylo‐Glo, DANIR 8c, or TNIR7‐1A, and differentiated in 50% ethanol under microscopic monitoring. Because strong acids can break the β‐sheet conformation, 36 sections used for Amylo‐Glo, DANIR 8c, or TNIR7‐1A stain were not generally pretreated with formic acid.

Bielschowsky silver stain was carried out by bringing the dewaxed sections into de‐ionized water. The sections were sensitized in 20% silver nitrate for 20 minutes and placed in water, with ammoniacal silver solution prepared. The sections were then impregnated in ammoniacal silver solution for ≈ 15 minutes. The staining pattern was monitored under a microscope, allowing neuronal fiber bundles and white matter stained black and the background appeared tan. The sections were further processed in a developer (2.5 mL of citric acid, 2 mL of 40% formalin, 1 drop of nitric acid, and 95.5 mL of tap water), washed in water, and fixed with sodium thiosulphate. For Gallyas silver stain, dewaxed and rehydrated paraffin sections were immersed in 5% sodium periodate for 30 minutes and the “zilver jodide oplossing” solution containing sodium hydroxide, potassium iodide, and silver nitrate for 30 minutes. The silver staining was precipitated in a developer with 10:3:7 mixer of solution A (5% sodium carbonate), B (0.2% ammonium nitrate, 0.2% silver nitrate, and 1% silicotungstic acid), and C (0.2% ammonium nitrate, 0.2% silver nitrate, 1% silicotungstic acid, and 0.75% formalin), washed in de‐ionized water, and fixed in sodium thiosulphate (5%).

2.4 Image acquisition and quantitative analyses

Bright‐field images were captured in a digital slide scanner (KF‐PRO‐120, Konfoong Bioinformation Tech Co., Ltd.) using the 20X objective, examined, and extracted with the K‐Viewer 1.0.5 software (KFBIO Digital Slide Viewer). Fluorescent images were acquired with a Keyence KV‐8000 imaging system (Keyence Corporation) using a Z‐stack setting of 1 µm. The images were examined, cropped, and edited (insertion of scale bar and cropped zones) with the BZ‐X800 Wide Image Viewer (Keyence Corporation).

Optic densitometry was used to quantify ɑSMA and COX immunohistochemical labeling. The area encompassing the hippocampal formation, entorhinal, and parahippocampal cortex in each section was exported. Original images from 10 to 15 brains were assembled and converted into a gray‐scale file using Photoshop, followed by densitometry using OptiQuant software (Packard Instruments). 24 The total optic densities (o.d.) of ɑSMA labeling, expressed as digital light unit per square millimeter (DLU/mm2), over the hilus/CA3, CA2/CA1, subicular subregions, granule cell layer (GCL), iML, and the middle part of the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) were measured using the free‐hand drawing tool. COX labeling was measured over CA2 to subicular subregions, the middle part of PHG, and white matter (WM) area. The lower border of the subicular zone was defined by using a “standard” anatomical landmark across samples, which is a horizontal line passing the low edge of the DG. Data were exported into an Excel spreadsheet, with the specific regional o.d. in a given section calculated using the density (serving as internal control) from the PHG or WM as cutoff.

Numerical densitometry was used to quantify the ɑSMA‐labeled neuritic clusters over CA2 to subicular subregions using two temporal lobe sections per brain. This was carried out on the K‐Viewer interface with the grid reference turned on. Zones of 200 µm x 200 µm unit areas were randomly generated according to the scales of the X and Y axes over the hippocampal formation. 37 , 38 The number of counting zones were 3 to 5 for CA2, 6 to 10 for CA1, and 10 to 15 for subicular subregions (Sub) together, including prosubiculum, subiculum, and part of presubiculum (within the DG edge). The number of clusters with a diameter ≈ ≥ 10 µm were recorded in each counting zone, with the mean numerical density (number of clusters per square millimeter) calculated for the three hippocampal subregions (CA2, CA1, and Sub).

Correlative “particle” analysis was used to quantify ɑSMA relative to BACE1 and to 6E10 labeling at hippocampal neuritic clusters or plaques (defined as “particles”) in fluorescently stained paraffin sections. High‐power image fields (≈ 500 × 500 µm2) with relatively abundant particles over CA2 (three non‐overlapping fields/per section), CA1 (five fields/section), and Sub (five fields/section) were cropped on the interface of the BZ‐X800 Wide Image Viewer. The labeled profiles in the selected image fields were then quantitatively analyzed on the Image J interface. Using one cropped image (merged) wherein all the particles of interest occurred separately as a temperate, we adjusted the low and high density thresholds such that the particles were outlined by their outer borders. The threshold values were recorded and then applied to other cropped image fields from the same paraffin section. αSMA‐labeled vascular and pericyte profiles, if they existed, were deselected by hand during this process. The measurement templates created in the merged image were applied to the corresponding single fluorescent images, with the fractional area and average o.d. of ɑSMA versus BACE1 or 6E10 at individual particles reported. Data were incorporated into Excel spreadsheets, with the particle areas converted into diameters ( = 2 X square root of [particle area/3.1416]). At the final data assembly, we deleted the particles with a diameter > 100 µm, considering that they could be related to merged neighboring plaques. For calculation of colocalization rates, particle profiles with the o.d. of both labelings > 0 were defined as being colocalized, while those with the o.d. of only one labeling > 0 considered singly labeled.

2.5 Statistical analysis and figure preparation

Data were analyzed statistically and graphed using Prism software (GraphPad Prism 10). The brain group data (mean ± standard deviation [SD]) of regional ɑSMA and COX densities were analyzed using one‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with Tukey multiple comparison post hoc tests applied to determine intergroup differences, if any. p value < 0.05 was set as the minimal level for significant difference. Figures were prepared with Photoshop 2025 by assembling representative microscopic images and graphs derived from data analyses.

3 RESULTS

3.1 ɑSMA labeling occurred ectopically in CA2 to subiculum in PART and ADNC brains

The ɑSMA labeling of vascular smooth muscle cells and pericytes was present in the sections across brain regions. The description of ɑSMA labeling in this study generally refers to the neuropil and neuritic labeling existing in the hippocampal formation, with vascular profiles circumstantially noted as an indication of antibody specificity. In the brains from the adult and elderly donors lacking tangle and plaques lesions (Braak/Thal scores 0/0), ɑSMA labeling occurred in the DG and CA3, with a clear wedge‐like transition at the CA3/CA2 border. Thus, the staining pattern and intensity in CA1 and Sub were comparable to the entorhinal and neocortical regions, essentially involving labeled blood vessels and pericytes by closer examination (Figure 1A, A1, B, B1, C).

FIGURE 1 Representative images showing ɑSMA relative to AT8 and 6E10 antibody labeling in temporal lobe sections from a control brain (A–C) and a brain with early PART (D–F). Donor's age and neuropathological staging information is indicated on the left. A, ɑSMA labeling is present distinctly in the hilus and CA2, with an even background reactivity over other hippocampal and cortical areas. The MF labeling appears in a wedged shape (insert) at the CA3/CA2 transition. A1, ɑSMA‐labeled vascular profiles are found across the section by closer examination, with faint reactivity in the GCL. B, No pTau‐labeled somal or neuritic profiles are found across the section, including in the Trans‐Ent area (B1). C, No Aβ plaques are visualized by the 6E10 antibody. D, Neuropil‐like ɑSMA labeling is present ectopically from CA2 to subicular subregions (arrows), with the labeling appeared outside the wedge at the CA3/CA2 transection (insert). D1, Enlarged view shows the neuropil‐like pattern of the aberrant ɑSMA labeling in subicular areas. E, E1, A small amount of AT8‐labeled neuronal somata and neuropil threads are found in the Trans‐Ent cortex, with no labeled profiles in the hippocampal formation. F, No plaques are found across the section. Scale bars are as indicated. Aβ, amyloid beta; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; DG, dentate gyrus; Ent, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; GCL, granule cell layer; HF, hippocampal fissure; Hi, hilus; I–IV, cortical layers; iML, inner molecular layer; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; MF, mossy fiber; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; oML, outer molecular layer; Para‐S, parasubiculum; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Pre‐S, presubiculum; Pro‐S, prosubiculum; pTau, phosphorylated tau; s.l.m., stratum lacunosum‐moleculare; s.o., stratum oriens; s.p., stratum pyramidale; s.r., stratum radiatum; Sub, subiculum; Trans‐Ent, transentorhinal; WM, white matter.

A de novo ɑSMA labeling was seen in CA2, CA1, and to varying distances over the subicular subregions including prosubiculum (Pro‐S), Sub, presubiculum (Pre‐S), and parasubiculum (Para‐S) in the brains with tangles alone (i.e., PART, Braak stage 1a to IV) and with ADNC of varying Braak and Thal scores. The wedge‐shaped MF ending at the CA3/CA2 border appeared less clear, with labeling outside the wedge spreading from here to CA2, CA1, and Sub. It should be noted that the extending distance of increased aSMA labeling over the subicular subregions varied between brains as well as section levels in the same brain. The change across these subregions would likely have the same pathological basis; therefore, for simplicity, the description and densitometry over the subicular regions are referred to together. Also, it should be noted that there was neither apparent widening of the iML nor granule cell dispersion in the PART and ADNC brains (Figures 1, 2, 3; Figures S1–S9 in supporting information).

FIGURE 2 ɑSMA relative to AT8 and 6E10 antibody labeling in temporal lobe sections from representative brains with PART (A–C) and ADNC (D–F). A, An enhanced ɑSMA labeling is seen as moving from CA2 to subicular subregions in this PART case, with fibrous profiles seen at high magnification (A1). B, AT8 labeled neuronal and neuritic profiles are present in the hippocampal formation (B1), entorhinal cortex, and temporal neocortex (B2). C, No Aβ plaques exist across the section. D, The ectopic ɑSMA labeling extends from CA2 to presubiculum. D1, Fibrous profiles (arrows) and neuritic clusters (arrowheads) are observed in the subiculum at high magnification, with enhanced labeling in the GCL and inner molecular layer. E, AT8‐labeled profiles are present in the temporal cortical areas and hippocampal formation, with enlarged views showing labeled neuronal profiles, neurites, and neuropil threads in the parahippocampal neocortex (E1) and CA2 (E2). F, A large amount of Aβ plaques exist over neocortical and entorhinal cortical areas at low magnification, with CAA also found by closer examination (F1). Plaques are present in all subregions and laminas of the hippocampal formation but with an overall lower density (F2). Scale bars are as indicated in the figure panels. Aβ, amyloid beta; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; ADNC, Alzheimer's disease neuropathologic change; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; DG, dentate gyrus; Ent, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; GCL, granule cell layer; HF, hippocampal fissure; Hi, hilus; I–IV, cortical layers; iML, inner molecular layer; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; MF, mossy fiber; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; oML, outer molecular layer; Para‐S, parasubiculum; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Pre‐S, presubiculum; Pro‐S, prosubiculum; pTau, phosphorylated tau; s.l.m., stratum lacunosum‐moleculare; s.o., stratum oriens; s.p., stratum pyramidale; s.r., stratum radiatum; Sub, subiculum; Trans‐Ent, transentorhinal; WM, white matter.

FIGURE 3 Densitometric analyses of regional hippocampal ɑSMA labeling relative to neurofibrillary tangle and Aβ plaque pathologies by Braak and Thal staging scores. Brain groups, case numbers, and region information are indicated. A, B, C, Optic densitometry of ɑSMA labeling in hippocampal subregions in five brain groups designated as control with Braak stage 0 and Thal phase 0 (0/0), PART 1 (1a–II/0), PART 2 (III–IV/0), ADNC 1 (II–IV/1), and ADNC 2 (II–VI/2–5). Specific optic density (o.d.) in CA2/CA1, subicular subregions (Sub), Hi/CA3, GCL, and iML are defined using the density obtained at the middle portion of the parahippocampal cortex in the same section as cutoff (A, B). Bar/dot graphs (C) plot the data and results of statistical analysis. D, E, F, Numeric densitometry of ɑSMA‐labeled clusters in CA2, CA1, and Sub in two brain groups as indicated. D, D1, D2, and D3, Randomized sampling method for counting the neuritic clusters. E, Data obtained from brains with tangle lesions at Braak stages II to IV and plaques in Thal phases 0 and 1. F, Data from another set of brains with Braak stages III and IV and Thal phase 3 scores. Scale bars are as indicated. Aβ, amyloid beta; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; ADNC, Alzheimer's disease neuropathologic change; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; DG, dentate gyrus; Ent, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; GCL, granule cell layer; HF, hippocampal fissure; Hi, hilus; I–IV, cortical layers; iML, inner molecular layer; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; MF, mossy fiber; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; oML, outer molecular layer; Para‐S, parasubiculum; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Pre‐S, presubiculum; Pro‐S, prosubiculum; pTau, phosphorylated tau; s.l.m., stratum lacunosum‐moleculare; s.o., stratum oriens; s.p., stratum pyramidale; s.r., stratum radiatum; Sub, subiculum; Trans‐Ent, transentorhinal; WM, white matter.

The ectopic ɑSMA labeling appeared predominantly neuropil‐like, with sparsely occurring fine fibrous profiles in the brains with milder NFTs lesions (Braak stages 1a–II; Figure 1D, D1, E, E1, F; Figure S1). In the PART brains with greater NFTs load (II–IV), swollen neurites were also found, appearing as isolated bulbous profiles and as clusters in varying sizes (Figure 2A, A1, B, B1, B2, C; Figure S2). In the brains with hippocampal Aβ plaques, ɑSMA‐labeled swollen neurites were seen across CA3 to Sub, appearing as isolated sphericles, spade‐shaped buds, and rosette‐like clusters in varying sizes, which appeared to be characteristic of dystrophic neurites (DNs; Figure 2D, D1, E, E1, E2, F, F1, F2; Figures S3–S9). In consecutive sections, BACE1‐labeled neuritic profiles with the same microscopic characteristics were present in the hippocampal subregions, whereas they also occurred in the entorhinal and neocortical regions wherein no ɑSMA‐labeled neurites existed (Figures S3, S4, S9). In the brains with end‐stage AD pathologies (Braak stages V/VI and Thal phases ≥ 3), ɑSMA and BACE1‐labeled DNs were seen in the DG including in the molecular layer and hilus.

We confirmed the presence of the aberrant neuropil/neuritic ɑSMA across the anterioposterior axis of the hippocampal formation in PART and ADNC brains. Shown for examples, the enhanced ɑSMA labeling in CA2 to Sub was observed in sections passing the head, body, and tail (Figure S10A in supporting information) of the hippocampus from a brain with Braak III (Figure S10B, B1–B5) and Thal 3 (Figure S10C) scores. This was also the case in another brain with III/1 scores (Figure S11 in supporting information).

3.2 ɑSMA labeling densities were increased regionally in PART and ADNC brains

Optic densities of ɑSMA labeling were measured over CA2/CA1, Sub, hilus/CA3, GCL, and iML in sections of the five designated brain groups (Table S1). In each brain, the specific o.d. (DLU/mm2) in the hippocampal regions was defined using the density obtained from the middle portion of the PHG as cutoff to control inter‐experimental staining variability and the confounding vascular labeling (Figure 3A, B). The specific o.d. in CA2/CA1 showed an overall difference among the groups (p < 0.0001, F = [4, 162] 46.2, one‐way ANOVA, same format below). The values (mean ± SD, same format below) were 1.8 ± 2.3, 4.4 ± 2.8, 5.3 ± 3.4, 13.1 ± 6.5, and 17.8 ± 10.0 DLU/mm2 in the groups with 0/0, 1a to II/0, III to IV/0, II to IV/1, and II to VI/2 to 5 scores, respectively. Tukey multiple comparisons post hoc tests indicated statistically significant differences for the II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5 relative to the remaining groups; and between the II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5 groups (Figure 3C). The values in Sub were 1.1 ± 1.5, 3.0 ± 2.7, 3.9 ± 2.8, 11.1 ± 6.4, and 12.1 ± 5.9 DLU/mm2 in the groups in the same listing order as above, with an overall difference (p < 0.0001, F [4, 162] = 44.1) and intergroup differences by post hoc test for the II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5 groups compared to the other groups ,  ,  ,  ,   (Figure 3C).

Beside the above areas with ectopic ɑSMA labeling, the specific o.d. in the hilus/CA3 showed an overall difference among the five brain groups (p < 0.0001, F [4, 162] = 155.4). The values were 14.9 ± 9.4, 20.4 ± 7.1, 23.5 ± 7.4, 56.8 ± 10.4, and 64.4 ± 16.6 DLU/mm2 in the groups with 0/0, 1a to II/0, III to IV/0, II to IV/1, and II to VI/2 to 5 scores, respectively. There were statistically significant differences for the 0/0 relative to III to IV/0, II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5, for the 1a to II/0 relative to II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5, and for the III to IV/0 relative to II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5, groups, respectively, as well as between the II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5 groups. The values in the GCL were 6.9 ± 6.0, 10.5 ± 4.1, 11.0 ± 6.1, 30.5 ± 8.6, and 35.5 ± 13.0 DLU/mm2 in the listed groups, respectively, showing significant overall difference (p < 0.0001, F [4, 162] = 87.7), and intergroup differences for II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 5 relative to the remaining individual groups, respectively. Furthermore, the values in the iML were 2.7 ± 2.9, 4.8 ± 3.4, 5.5 ± 4.4, 17.2 ± 6.5, and 20.9 ± 8.9 DLU/mm2, respectively, also with an overall group difference (p < 0.0001, F [4, 162] = 71.3) and intergroup differences similar to the above GCL data (Figure 3C).

The ɑSMA‐labeled neuritic clusters exhibited a high‐to‐low gradient as moving from CA2 to Sub in the PART and ADNC brains (Figure 3D, D1, D2, D3; Figures S3C, C1, C2, C3; S4C, C1, C2; S5C, D, E, F). We randomly selected two sets of brains and used the sections for numeric densitometry. The first set (n = 19) had NFTs at Braak stages II to IV without hippocampal Aβ plaques (Thal phases 0 and 1). The second set (n = 12) had NFTs at Braak stages III to VI with moderate plaque lesions (Thal phase 3). In the first group, the numerical densities (mean ± SD) of ɑSMA‐labeled neuritic clusters were 18.3 ± 19.6, 8.5 ± 13.8, and 3.8 ± 5.4 clusters/mm2 in CA2, CA1, and Sub. There was an overall significant difference among the regional data (p = 0.0004, F = [1.4, 25.1] 13.7), with the density in CA2 higher than in CA1 and Sub (Figure 3E). In the second group, the values were 28.7 ± 20.2, 8.7 ± 6.4, and 2.7 ± 1.9 clusters/mm2 in CA2, CA1, and Sub. There was also an overall difference (p = 0.001, F = [1.2, 12.9] 16.4), with intergroup significant differences for CA2 compared to CA1 and Sub, respectively, and between CA1 and Sub (Figure 3F).

3.3 ɑSMA‐labeled neurites infiltrated into ghost tangles and co‐expressed amyloidogenic markers in PART brains

“Tangle‐associated neuritic clusters (TANCs)” appears to be first named by Munoz and Wang in a description of tau and chromogranin A expressing neuritic aggregates at extracellular (ghost) tangles not associated with extracellular Aβ deposits. They saw abundant TANCs in the hippocampus from patients with AD and to a lesser extent in non‐demented elderly. 39 Other studies reported the infiltration of DNs labeled by amyloid precursor protein (APP) and some A4 (Aβ) antibodies into ghost tangles. 40 , 41 An electron microscopic study found swollen presynaptic axon terminals as well as neurites with tau filaments in TANCs in the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex in brains from patients with progressive supranuclear palsy but lacking Aβ plaques. 42 Astrocytic infiltration into ghost tangles was also well established in early studies. 43 , 44

Thin‐cut sections allow a better identification of these small‐sized neuritic structures; we first used temporal lobe paraffin sections from six PART brains to determine whether the aberrant ɑSMA‐expressing neurites might contribute to TANCs but possess the molecular machinery for Aβ production. Thus, AT8 antibody immunolabeling and Bielschowsky and Gallyas silver stains were used to appraise tangle pathology. The “amyloidogenic” machinery was assessed with immunolabeling of APP (22C11 and Y188); BACE1; and several Aβ antibodies including 6E10, D54D2, 4G8, Ter40, and Ter42 45 , 46 , 47 (Table S2). Representative bright‐field images of the above characterizations are presented as supplementary data in an atlas style for detailed visibility (Figures S12–S30 in supporting information).

Thus, in temporal lobe sections from a 99‐year‐old donor (IV/0), AT8 labeling was prominent in the CA and subicular subregions, moderate in entorhinal and parahippocampal cortex, and detectable in the DG and superior temporal neocortex. Lightly stained pyramidal neurons had granular immunoreaction product in the soma and dendrites, representing a pretangle change. Darkly stained mature tangles had a typical flame shape, while neuritic clusters consisted of bulbous and fibrous structures (Figure S12A, A1, A2, B, B1, and B2). Bielschowsky (Figure S12C, C1, C2, D, D1 and D2) and Gallyas (Figure S12E, E1, E2, F, F1, and F2) stain labeled profiles with a comparable regional distribution as seen in AT8 sections. Both methods stained mature tangles heavily, while ghost tangles were stained lighter in a fibrous morphological configuration. Bulbous neurites occurred at the loci of ghost tangles, better seen in Bielschowsky than in Gallyas preparation (Figure S12C2, D2, and F2). The 6E10 antibody lightly stained individual and clustered swollen neurites in the above areas with tangles (Figure S12G, G1, H, H1, H2, and H3). The D54D2 antibody could also visualize these neurites but was not as potent as 6E10 (Figure S13). On the contrary, the 4G8 and Ter42 antibodies did not visualize specific labeling across the sections (Figures S14 and S15). However, the Ter40 antibody displayed fibrous structures arranged in neuronal outlines (Figure S16), representing ghost tangles as previously established with this Ter40 and other anti‐Aβx‐40 antibodies. 48 , 49 In parallelly processed sections from ADNC brains (Figure S17), Ter40 labeled (with formic treatment) both ghost tangles and Aβ plaques across the temporal neocortical and entorhinal cortical regions and hippocampal formation. The 22C11 (not shown) and Y188 APP (Figures S18) and BACE1 (Figures S19) antibodies visualized the bulbous neuritic profiles in CA2 to Sub. In another set of sections from an 87‐year‐old donor (II/0), tangles occurred in the hippocampal formation and entorhinal cortex in AT8 (Figure S20), Bielschowsky (Figure S21), and Gallyas (Figure S22) preparations. Swollen neurites were also labeled by 6E10 (Figure S23) and D54D2 (Figure S24) largely in CA2 and CA1, and in Sub to a lesser extent. Again, no specific immunolabeling was revealed by the 4G8 (Figure S25) and Ter42 (Figure S26) antibodies. Ghost tangles were clearly labeled by Ter40 with a high‐to‐low gradient as moving from CA2 to subicular subregions (Figure S27). Individual swollen neurites and clusters were labeled by the Y188 (Figure S28) and 22C11 APP (Figure S29) and BACE1 (Figure S30) antibodies.

Thus, we further carried out fluorescent labeling profiling. In AT8, Ter40, and Amylo‐Glo triple‐labeling (no formic treatment), there existed a full spectrum of fluorescence output (Figure 4A, A1, A2, A3). AT8 (red) and Amylo‐Glo (bright blue) singly labeled profiles were the two extremities of the spectrum, likely representing pretangle and end‐stage ghost tangle entities, respectively. In the middle range, flame‐shaped somal and truncated somatodendritic profiles showed bright AT8/Amylo‐Glo co‐labeling (appearing pink), representing mature and early ghost tangles. Many fibrous structures in neuronal outlines were co‐labeled by Ter42 and Amylo‐Glo, while some of these ghost tangles were infiltrated by bulbous and elongated neurites labeled by AT8 alone or with light Amylo‐Glo stain (Figure 4A1, A2, A3).

FIGURE 4 Triple fluorescent profiling of NFTs and TANCs in a PART brain (IV/0). Antibody/probe markers and fluorescence channels are indicated. Panels (A), (A1, CA1/CA2 border), (A2, Pro‐S), (A3, Ent) show a transitional colocalization pattern of AT8, Ter40, and Amylo‐Glo labeling among the tangle profiles. AT8 singly labeled profiles appearing in red include the pretangle‐like somata (pointed at by arrows) and neurites infiltrated into the ghost tangles. The flame‐shape somal and somatodendritic profiles with bright AT8 and Amyloid‐Glo co‐labeling in purple appear to be mature tangles (arrowheads). There are a great number of ghost tangles exhibiting mixed Ter40 and Amylo‐Glo co‐labeling signal, with a small number of ghost tangles stained by Amyloid‐Glo only appearing in bright blue (hallowed arrows). Panels (B), (B1, CA1), (B2, Pro‐S) show the infiltration of αSMA‐labeled neurites in Amylo‐Glo labeled ghost tangles, which can occur near AT8‐labeled neurites (B2). In the dentate hilus, αSMA‐labeled MF terminals can infiltrated into the sparsely occurred ghost tangles as well (B3). C, C1, C2, C3, αSMA‐labeled aggregates located between Ter40/Amylo‐Glo–labeled fibrous ghost tangle structures. D, D1, D2, and D3, Partial colocalization of ɑSMA and 6E10 labeling among the swollen neurites at some ghost tangles. The ɑSMA‐labeled neurites appear to be more densely packed among the ghost tangles in CA2 relative to CA1 and Sub (B1, B2, C1, C2, C3, D1, D2, and D3). The αSMA‐labeled terminals are not double labeled with the astrocytic marker GFAP (E, E1) or the microglial marker Iba1 (F, F1), while both astrocytic and microglial processes can infiltrate into the ghost tangles (E1, F1). Hollowed arrowheads point to examples of αSMA‐labeled small vessels or pericytes (B1–B3, C1–C3, D1–D3, E1, and F1). Scale bars are as indicated; the color bars in the enlarged panels equal to 25 µm. ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; ADNC, Alzheimer's disease neuropathologic change; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; DG, dentate gyrus; Ent, entorhinal cortex; FG, fusiform gyrus; GCL, granule cell layer; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; HF, hippocampal fissure; Hi, hilus; I–IV, cortical layers; Iba1, ionized calcium‐binding adaptor molecule 1; iML, inner molecular layer; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; MF, mossy fiber; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; oML, outer molecular layer; Para‐S, parasubiculum; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Pre‐S, presubiculum; Pro‐S, prosubiculum; pTau, phosphorylated tau; s.l.m., stratum lacunosum‐moleculare; s.o., stratum oriens; s.p., stratum pyramidale; s.r., stratum radiatum; Sub, subiculum; TANC, tangle‐associated neuritic cluster; Trans‐Ent, transentorhinal; WM, white matter.

In ɑSMA/AT8 (Figure 4B, B1, B2, B3) and ɑSMA/Ter40 (Figure 4C, C1, C2, C3) double immunofluorescence with Amylo‐Glo counterstain, ɑSMA‐labeled neurites accumulated inside and surrounding the ghost tangles. These aggregates appeared to be denser at the ghost tangles in CA2 relative to CA1 and Sub. By close examination, ɑSMA and AT8 labeling appeared to occur in separate populations of neurites, and the ɑSMA‐labeled neurites did not exhibit Amylo‐Glo fluorescence (Figure 4B, B1, B2, B3). In 6E10 and αSMA double immunolabeling with formic acid section pretreatment, the 6E10 labeled neuritic clusters were colocalized among a subset of αSMA‐labeled clusters in CA2 and CA1 (Figure 4D, D1, D2). As moving toward the subicular subregions, the αSMA labeled neurites tended to reduce in density and size over the regions but also at the clusters with αSMA/6E10‐positive neurites (Figure 4D, D3). Besides the neuritic profiles, astrocytic and microglial processes labeled with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and ionized calcium‐binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1), respectively, appeared to infiltrate into the ghost tangles and distribute near the αSMA‐expressing neurites (Figure 4E, E1, F, F1). However, there was no direct colocalization of αSMA with GFAP or Iba1 immunofluorescence (Figure 4E1, F1).

We further characterized the neuritic profiles in PART brains regarding their amyloidogenic potential using a multi‐labeling approach. The 6E10‐positive neurites were largely co‐labeled by the BACE1 (Figure 5A, A1) and Y188 APP (Figure 5B, B1) antibodies, with Y188 additionally visualized the axonal bundles in the white matter and along the perforant path (PP) and the alveus, including a fiber division entering the hilus in the CA3 area (Figure 5B). There was a colocalization of BACE1 and 22C11 APP antibody labeling in the swollen neurites located at Amylo‐Glo–stained ghost tangles, with 22C11 additionally also labeled neuronal somata and processes (Figure 5C, C1). No plaque‐like deposition was visualized by the DANIR‐8c Aβ probe across the entire section. However, small amounts of the Aβ probe staining could be occasionally seen around the BACE1‐labeled neurites (Figure 5D, D1). Further, the BACE1‐labeled neurites coexisted in mix with AT8‐labeled neurites at the ghost tangles counterstained by Amylo‐Glo (Figure 5E, E1), with BACE1/AT8 colocalization at a subset of the swollen terminals (Figure 5E, E1). The AT8 antibody also visualized relatively dense plexus profiles along the PP and stratum oriens (s.o.) over the CA and subicular regions (Figure 5E). BACE1‐labeled neurites coexisted (appeared largely not colocalized) with the neuritic profiles stained by the selective tangle probe TNIR7 (Figure 5F, F1). As moving from CA2 to subicular subregions, the proportion of αSMA relative to BACE1‐labeled neurites at the ghost tangles appeared to reduce (Figure 5G, G1, G2, G3). Finally, αSMA‐labeled neuritic clusters were found to occur between sortilin‐labeled normal‐looking neuronal somata in the pyramidal cell layer (Figure 5H, H1, H2, H3). 25

FIGURE 5 Multi‐labeling characterization of TANCs in sections from PART brains. Antibody/probe markers, fluorescence channels, and case information are indicated on the left of the image panels. High‐power views cropped from different locations from CA2 to subiculum are indicated in the low‐magnification maps. A, A1, Colocalization of 6E10 and BACE1 labeling in the swollen neurites. B, B1, Colocalization of labeling of 6E10 with that of the Y188 rabbit antibody against human APP in the swollen neuritic clusters, with the staining carried out without section pretreatment with formic acid; note the Y188 labeling along the PP and extending into the outer molecular layer (green arrows), and along the Alv, Fm, and s.o., with a fiber division entering the hilus (purple arrows). C, C1, Colocalization of BACE1 and the 22C11 APP antibody labeling in the neuritic clusters located at Amylo‐Glo stained ghost tangles, with 22C11 also labeled neuronal somata and their proximal dendrites. D, D1, Occasional occurrence of DANIR‐8c Aβ probe staining around the BACE1 labeled swollen neurites. E, E1, Partial colocalization of BACE1 and AT8 labeling among the neurites infiltrated into the ghost tangles visualized by Amylo‐Glo. F, F1, Coexistence of BACE1‐labeled neurites with TNIR7‐stained tangle neurites, with the former also occurring by the side of mature‐like tangles (pointed at by arrows). G, G1, G2, G3, Coexistence of ɑSMA‐ and BACE1‐labeled neurites at ghost tangles in CA2, CA1, and Sub. The ɑSMA‐labeled neurites are a part of BACE1‐positive neurites but appear to be reduced in proportion as moving from CA2 toward subiculum. H, H1, H2, H3, Localization of ɑSMA‐labeled clusters to the spaces between sortilin‐labeled pyramidal neurons, with a reduced density as moving from CA2 to Sub. Scale bars are as indicated; the color bars in the enlarged panels equal 25 µm. Aβ, amyloid beta; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; Alv, alveus; APP, amyloid precursor protein; BACE1, β‐secretase 1; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; Fm, fimbria; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PP, perforant path; s.o., stratum oriens; Sub, subiculum; TANC, tangle‐associated neuritic cluster.

3.4 ɑSMA‐labeled dystrophic neurites existed at ghost tangles and plaques in ADNC brains

We conducted double and triple fluorescent experiments using sections from ADNC brains (Braak stages III–VI and Thal phase 3–5, n = 6) to verify the existence of αSMA‐labeled neurites also at ghost tangles and amyloid plaques. Neuropathological patterns were assessed with 6E10, phosphorylated tau (p‐tau), and silver staining, with images from a 75‐year‐old case (IV/2 scores) shown as an example (Figure S31 in supporting information). Thus, the 6E10 antibody visualized extensive Aβ deposition appearing as diffuse and compact plaques as well as cerebral amyloid angiopathy in the temporal cortex and hippocampal formation in formic‐treated section (Figure S31A, A1–A4). In comparison, lighter and fewer extracellular Aβ labeling occurred in a parallelly stained section without formic pretreatment (Figure S31B, B1–B4). The swollen neurites and clusters were labeled by 6E10 with or without formic treatment. In fact, they appeared less masked by the extracellular Aβ deposits in the section without formic treatment (Figure S31A1, B1, A3, and B3). AT8‐labeled somal and neuritic tangles in the cortical and hippocampal subregions including the hilus and molecular layer (Figure S31C, C1–C4). The silver stains visualized mature and ghost tangles, TANCs, and neuritic plaques (Figure S31D, D1, D2, E, and E1).

In double immunofluorescence, Ter40 labeled ghost tangles, with Ter40/6E10 double labeling at extracellular plaques and blood vessels (Figure S32A, A1–A3 in supporting information). 6E10 labeled DNs colocalized with APP (Figure S32B, B1–B3). A mixed BACE1 and AT8 double labeling pattern was seen at neuritic clusters with or without Amylo‐Glo co‐staining. Specifically, BACE1/AT8 double‐labeled swollen neurites existed in the hippocampal, subicular, and dentate subregions as well as in the temporal cortex (Figure S32C, C1–C7). The neurofilament light chain (NfL) antibody visualized the normally arranged WM fibers and axonal pathways including the PP and alveus (Figure S32D). A small subset of BACE1‐labeled DNs exhibited NfL reactivity (Figure S32D1–D3).

In temporal lobe sections from two other ADNC brains, the Ter40 antibody visualized isolated ghost tangles, some of which contained localized 6E10 labeling, with Ter40/6E10 double immunofluorescence seen among plaque profiles (Figure 6A, A1, A2, A3 and Figure S33A, A1, A2, A3 in supporting information). AT8 and APP (Y188) labeling was colocalized at individual neuritic sphericles or a subset of swollen neurites at ghost tangles or neuritic plaques according to Amylo‐Glo counterstain (Figure 6B, B1, B2, B3 and Figure S33B, B1, B2, B3). αSMA labeling was seen at a subset of APP‐labeled neurites at ghost tangles or neuritic plaques (Figure 6C, C1, C2, C3 and Figure S33C, C1, C2, C3). αSMA‐ and AT8‐labeled neurites could coexist at the same cluster structure but generally not directly colocalized (Figure 6D, D1, D2, D3 and Figure S33D, D1, D2, and D3).

FIGURE 6 Multi‐labeling characterization of tangle‐ and plaque‐associated neuritic structures in sections from a brain with end‐stage AD neuropathologies. Donor's age, pathological staging, antibody/probe markers, and fluorescence channels are indicated above the image panels. A, A1, A2, and A3, Differential labeling patterns of the 6E10 and Ter40 antibodies under the condition of formic acid section pretreatment. Ter40 labeling occurs at ghost tangles with or without focal colocalization with 6E10 reactivity (A1, A2), and also at 6E10 labeled extracellular Aβ plaques including at the core (A3). The Amylo‐Glo staining of tangles and plaques is largely diminished. B, B1, B2, B3, Partial colocalization of AT8 and APP among neuritic profiles located discretely (arrows) around the PP (green arrows) and s.o. (purple arrows), or in association with ghost tangles (B1) and neuritic plaques (B3) by referring to the Amylo‐Glo counterstain. C, C1, C2, C3, Partial colocalization of αSMA and APP among the tangle or plaque associated neuritic profiles, which are mostly seen in CA2 to the proximal subicular regions (C1, C2), but not or rarely in the presubiculum and parasubiculum (C3). D, D1, D2, and D3, Coexistence of αSMA‐ and AT8‐positive neurites around ghost tangles (D1) and neuritic plaques (D2). In the dentate gyrus (D3), both types of labeled neurites can occur in the molecular layer and hilus, and can be occasionally colocalized (arrows), while AT8‐labeled granule cells and mossy cells are encountered (arrowheads). Scale bars are as indicated; color bars in the enlarged panels equal 25 µm. Aβ, amyloid beta; AD, Alzheimer's disease; APP, amyloid precursor protein; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; DG, dentate gyrus; Hi, hilus; ML, molecular layer; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; PP, perforant path; Pre‐S, presubiculum; pTau, phosphorylated tau; s.o., stratum oriens; s.p., stratum pyramidale; WM, white matter.

3.5 ɑSMA labeling coexisted differentially with BACE1 and Aβ in PART and ADNC brains

To estimate αSMA relative to BACE1 and Aβ labeling quantitatively, we used a “particle” analysis approach to measure the fractional areas or fluorescence intensities at individual cluster or plaque profiles in CA2, CA1, and Sub in PART and ADNC. We quantified ɑSMA/BACE1 labeling among 404 neuritic clusters from 4 PART brains (II–IV/0) and 1100 clusters from 10 ADNC brains (II–VI/2–5; Figure 7A, B, Cand Figures S34 in supporting information), and ɑSMA/6E10 labeling among 1623 neuritic and/or plaques profiles from the above ADNC brains (Figure 7E, F and Figures S35 in supporting information).

FIGURE 7 Particle analyses on ɑSMA relative to BACE1 and 6E10 labeling among neuritic clusters and Aβ plaques in PART and ADNC brains. Antibody/probe markers, fluorescence channels, brain information, number of quantified profiles, and anatomical locations are indicated. A, Triple labeling image (ADNC), with enlarged fields (A1, A2, A3) displaying a reduced proportion of ɑSMA labeling relative to BACE1‐labeled neurites in the clusters from CA2 to subiculum. B, Threshold‐based selection of the “particle” (i.e., anatomically neuritic cluster or plaque) profiles of interest on Image‐J interface. The total particle area (converted into diameter in µm), fractional area (%), and fluorescence intensity (DLU/mm2) of ɑSMA and BACE1 labeling of the particle profiles are reported. C, Number of single‐ and double‐labeled profiles in CA2, CA1, and Sub in the PART and ADNC brains, yielding the percentage rates (mean ± standard deviation) as indicated in the graphs. D, Fractional areas of ɑSMA‐ and BACE1‐labeled neurites among individual clusters, with the curves (third‐order non‐linear fitting) indicating their trend change relative to the increase of cluster diameter. E, An example of ɑSMA/6E10 double labeling, with the enlarged fields (E1, E2, E3, E1’) illustrating single‐ (i.e., aSMA clusters) and double‐labeled profiles (arrowheads). aSMA‐labeled blood vessels and pericytes are pointed at by arrows. F, Percentage rates (upper row) of single‐ and double‐labeled profiles in the three hippocampal regions, and the trend change in ɑSMA and 6E10 labeling intensity relative to diameter (low row). Aβ, amyloid beta; ADNC, Alzheimer's disease neuropathologic change; ɑSMA, alpha‐smooth muscle actin; BACE1, β‐secretase 1; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; DG, dentate gyrus; PART, primary age‐related tauopathy; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Sub, subiculum.

A small number of “pure” ɑSMA‐labeled neuritic clusters (i.e., the specific o.d. of BACE = 0) existed in CA2 (≈ 6%) and CA1 (≈ 1%) in the PART and ADNC brains, with none in Sub (Figure 7C). The rate of “pure” BACE1‐labeled clusters (i.e., the specific o.d. of ɑSMA = 0) was higher in Sub relative to CA2 and CA1. Most clusters (≈ ≥ 80%) contained both ɑSMA and BACE1 neurites (i.e., the specific o.d. of both > 0) in CA2 and CA1 in the PART and ADNC brains, and in Sub in the PART group (Figure 7C). There was a trend of decline of the fractional area of ɑSMA neurites among the clusters in CA2 relative to CA1 and further to Sub. With the increase in particle size, the fractional areas of ɑSMA‐ as well as BACE1‐labeled neurites tended to reduce in all the three hippocampal regions (Figure 7D).

In aSMA/6E10 double labeling preparations, ≈ 75%, 41%, and 13% profiles were labeled by aSMA only in CA2, CA2, and Sub, respectively, while ≈ 3%, 17%, and 60% were labeled by 6E10 only in the above regions (Figure 7F, upper row). Among the colocalized profiles, ɑSMA fluorescence was generally brighter among the smaller particles (≈ 10–25 µm) and tended to decline with the increase of particle size. ɑSMA fluorescence also appeared brighter among the CA2 relative to CA1 and subicular profiles. The brightness of 6E10 labeling was light among the small profiles with diameters ≈ 10 µm, tended to increase among those ≈ 30 to 40 µm, and then decline among larger profiles (Figure 7F, low row graphs).

3.6 COX labeling was increased in CA2 to subiculum in brains with PART and early ADNC

We included a few sections of the occipital lobe in most immunohistochemical experiments as a measure to appraise the specificity of the COX antibody. The immunolabeling visualized the columnar organization in areas 17 and 18 and was localized largely to neuropil, with some large‐sized neuronal somata morphologically resembling interneurons exhibited strong reactivity (Figure 8A, A1). These morphological features were consistent with the histochemical staining pattern of this mitochondrial enzyme in the primate visual cortex. 50 , 51 However, the staining in the sections from many brains with late‐stage ADNC appeared uneven over the gray matter, with enhanced reactivity often occurring around blood vessels (Figure 8A, A2, B, B, B2, C). This pointed to the impact of some confounding factors affecting COX expression, potentially neuronal loss and inflammation. To avoid interpretative difficulty, we excluded the cases with a disrupted labeling pattern (including all cases with Thal phase 6 plaque lesion) at the final stage of data assembly; as such, the size sample was smaller relative to that used in densitometry of ɑSMA labeling.

FIGURE 8 Microscopic characterization and densitometrical analysis of COX immunoreactivity relative to AD pathology staging scores. Case information, anatomical regions, image arrangements, and scale bars are as indicated. A, A1, A2, Assessment of COX immunolabeling pattern in the visual cortex; the blob organization (pointed by triangle symbols) is visible in areas 17 and 18, with large interneuron‐like cells showed heavy immunoreactivity (A1 and enlarged view). The labeling pattern is uneven with enhanced perivascular reactivity in the section from the end‐stage AD case (A2 and enlarged view). B, B1, B2, C, Disruption of COX labeling in the late‐stage AD brain is also seen in the temporal lobe including in the hippocampal formation. B, D, Temporal lobe section images from representative cases, with the age and pathological staging scores indicated. o.d.s in the circular areas are measured using the same method shown in Figure 3, with the density obtained in the WM area used as threshold cutoff to define the specific o.d. in other areas. E, Specific o.d. in CA2 to Sub and the middle part of PHG in individual brains allocated into four groups as indicated. Based on post hoc tests, the mean value in CA2 to Sub is significantly higher in the II to IV/1 compared to the 0/0 group, while the mean in the PHG is significantly reduced in the II to VI/2 to 4 group compared to the II to IV/1 group. F, Stratified analysis of COX alteration in CA2 to Sub relative to PHG in the groups. The means of the CA2‐Sub/PHG specific o.d. ratio (%) are significantly increased in the 1a to II/0, III to IV/0 and II to IV/I groups compared to control (0/0). AD, Alzheimer's disease; CA1–CA3, Ammon's horn subregions; COX, cytochrome c oxidase; FG, fusiform gyrus; DG, dentate gyrus; o.d., optic density; Para‐S, parasubiculum; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; Pre‐S, presubiculum; Sub, subiculum; WM, white matter.

Across the cortical and hippocampal regions in the temporal lobe sections, COX immunolabeling appeared to be increased largely in CA1 and subicular subregions in PART and ADNC brains relative to control (Figure 8B, C, D). Densitometry was therefore focused on the measurement of o.d. over CA2 to Sub (also to match the densitometry of the ectopic ɑSMA labeling), the WM area and the gray matter area in the middle portion of PHG. The specific o.d. in CA2 to Sub and PHG were calculated by using the WM o.d. in the same section as the cutoff (Figure 8B, D). The o.d. values in CA2‐Sub and PHG showed an overall significant difference (p < 0.0001, F [7, 236] = 17.9, one‐way ANOVA) among the four brain groups allocated as control (Braak and Thal staging scores 0/0, n = 19), PART (1a–IV/0, n = 43), ADNC without plaques in the hippocampus (II–IV/1, n = 39), and ADNC with hippocampal plaques (II–VI/2–4, n = 21). The values in CA2‐Sub were higher in the 1a to IV/0 and II to IV/1 relative to 0/0 and II to VI/2 to 4 groups. A Tukey multiple comparisons post hoc test indicated a significant difference in the o.d. of CA2‐Sub between the 0/0 and II to IV/1 groups, and in the II to VI/2 to 4 compared to the 1a to IV/0 and II to IV/1 groups, respectively; and in the o.d. of PHG between the II to IV/1 and II to VI/2 to 4 groups, with the p value (0.052) between the II to VI/2 to 4 and 0/0 groups approaching statistical significance (Figure 8E). We calculated the ratio (%) of CA2‐Sub to PHG o.d. and plotted the data by separating the PART cases into 1a to II/0 (n = 23) and III to IV/0 (n = 20) subgroups. This analysis showed an overall group difference (p = 0.0007, F [4, 117] = 5.2), with a significant increase of the COX o.d. ratio in the 1a to II/0, II to IV/0, and II to IV/1 groups compared to the control group by post hoc test (Figure 8F).

4 DISCUSSION

MF terminals form the giant synapse that is characterized by complex anatomical architecture and dynamic structural/functional plasticity. 49 , 50 Given its central place for hippocampal network functioning, whether MF integrity is affected during brain aging and AD pathogenesis is an issue of interest. This question remained open, although many presynaptic markers are useful to study the normal and aberrant MF innervation pattern, such as ZnT3, 52 dynorphin, 53 synaptic vesicle proteins, 54 and BACE1. 25 , 46 , 54 , 55 αSMA expression at the MF terminals appears fairly distinct relative to the general presynaptic markers from phylogenic and ontogenic perspectives. 24 The current study identified an ectopic neuritic αSMA immunolabeling over CA2 to Sub in PART and ADNC brains compared to controls, with this aberrant pattern not recognizable in BACE1 and Timm (data not shown) stain preparations. Thus, αSMA appears to be a highly selective marker with superior signal‐to‐noise resolution to reveal MF alteration. The ectopic αSMA labeling extended coronally to as far as the Para‐S and throughout the sagittal hippocampal dimension, and occurred readily in PART brains with early Braak stages of NFTs. αSMA labeling intensity was also increased in hilus/CA3, GCL, and iML in brains with ADNC. Besides the pattern and density changes, αSMA labeled swollen neurites developed over CA2 to subicular subregions in PART and ADNC brains, with a high‐to‐low densitometric gradient. These findings suggest a possibility of long distance MF sprouting outside (from) their normal anatomical territory in the dentate gyrus and CA3 regions. However, the ectopic αSMA labeling in PART and ADNC brains occurred largely in a diffuse manner without forming fibrous band‐like structures as seen in resected human hippocampi with epileptic sclerosis. 25 Therefore, an alternative possibility should be considered for the aberrant labeling pattern. In this regard, silent synapses are believed to exist widely in the brain, which are thought to consist of precursor or immature forms of synaptic terminals. 56 Therefore, we also wonder whether the aberrant αSMA labeling might arise from some “silent” MF elements in the hippocampal subregions. Regardless of which scenario is more likely, the morphological and densitometric data of αSMA labeling suggest early‐onset and broad MF reorganization in PART and ADNC human brains relative to controls.

The relationship between tangle and plaque formation and between neuritic dystrophy and amyloid deposition are central questions asked by generations of researchers studying AD neuropathologies. 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 To explore the early formation of ɑSMA‐positive neurites, we came across the discoveries of TANCs in the 1990s. These lesions were reported in the brains from aged and AD individuals, and patients with parkinsonism‐dementia and progressive supranuclear palsy. 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 61 Thus, TANCs were found to consist of the so‐called type 1 and type 2 DNs that were also identified at senile plaques, 62 , 63 corresponding to the elongated tangle‐bearing neurites and globular terminals expressing chromogranin A, APP, and neurotransmitter markers. Notably, the Braak and Thal staging systems were not widely applied in those days, 3 , 4 , 28 , 29 while the definition of PART was not established until more than a decade later. 5 We also know better today that pathological comorbidity of neurodegenerative diseases can exist in post mortem elderly human brains. 64

In the present study, TANCs were observed readily in PART brains in silver stain and immunohistochemical preparations, with fluorescent characterizations suggested a coexistence of type 1 and type 2 DNs. Thus, type 1 DNs appeared elongated in general and exhibited bright AT8 labeling, while type 2 were bulbous, co‐expressed APP and BACE1, and could be labeled by the 6E10 and D54D2 but not 4G8 and Ter42 Aβ antibodies. ɑSMA and AT8 labeling occurred among a subset of BACE1‐ or APP‐positive type 2 DNs, while ɑSMA/AT8 co‐labeled DNs were rarely or occasionally (i.e., in late‐stage ADNC cases at the dentate molecular layer and hilus) seen. These findings imply that axon terminals of multiple neuronal origins may infiltrate into and form type 2 DNs at ghost tangles, similar to the multi‐system axonal innervation to neuritic plaques. 46 , 51 , 65 The AT8 labeling of the axonal type 2 DNs in PART and ADNC brains was remarkable. Previous studies have shown pathological axonal p‐tau labeling along the anatomical output routes of entorhinal and hippocampal projection neurons, including the pillar of the fornix, 66 the perforant path, 6 and MF and Schaffer collateral pathways. 67 In our immunolabeling preparations, there also existed a rich plexus of AT8 labeling around the stratum oriens, which contains axons of the hippocampal pyramidal neurons travelling between the CA and subicular subregions. As with our observation, AT8/APP double‐labeled DNs were reported in AD human hippocampus. 68 Taken together, it appears that p‐tau–bearing axon terminals can undergo dystrophy with enhanced amyloidogenic propensity, thereby potentially contributing to plaque formation. It should be noted that in the PART brains type 2 DNs were rarely co‐labeled by the dual amyloid/tangle dye Amylo‐Glo or the selective Aβ probe NADIR‐8c, similar to the pattern seen in injury/stress‐induced pathological axons in adult human brains. 47 The lack of Aβ tracer labeling suggests that the axonal labeling by some Aβ antibodies (i.e., 6E10 and D54D2) might relate to a cross‐reactivity to APP β‐C‐terminal fragments (β‐CTFs), 45 , 69 although these axonal profiles possess the biochemical basis for Aβ overproduction. Using a “particle analysis” approach, we established a differential coexistence of αSMA relative to BACE1 neurites over CA2, CA1, to Sub in PART and ADNC brains, while ɑSMA‐positive DNs could exist independent of and in association with hippocampal Aβ plaques in ADNC brains. The trend curves of the fractional area of ɑSMA/BACE1‐positive neurites and the labeling intensity of ɑSMA/6E10 were consistent with a potential “dilution” or burnout effect with neuritic plaque growth. Overall, our current findings are compatible with the existing viewpoints that PART may be a precursor condition of ADNC in pathological perspective; 6 , 30 ghost tangles may be the nidus of neuritic plaques at least in the hippocampus; 41 and neuritic plaques may potentially evolve through primitive, mature, and burnout stages. 57 , 70

Early studies have reported the extracellular tangle labeling by Ter40 and other anti‐Aβx‐40 antibodies in AD human brains, which was interpreted as a result of Aβ absorption into or antibody cross‐reaction with some non‐Aβ epitopes in the tangle remaining. 48 , 49 The current study observed abundant presence of Ter40‐labeled ghost tangles in definitive PART brains with and without formic acid section pretreatment, which would appear more compatible with the second interpretation. Recently, scientists have discussed the issue of epitope cross‐reactivity in Aβ measurements as AD biomarkers. 45 , 71 In this regard, the “conspiratorial” Aβx‐40 labeling of ghost tangles may raise a concern of being a confounding factor in Aβ40 measurement if it were actually a cross‐reactivity to the peptide p3 (Aβ16/17‐40/42) or other APP metabolites with the Aβx‐40 epitopes. The volume of the cerebral neocortex is ≈ 100 times that of the hippocampus. 72 Thus, hypothetically, as tauopathy and tangle formation propagate in the neocortex, the levels of p‐tau as well as the tangle‐associated Aβx‐40 products could rise simultaneously and significantly.

As denoted in the Introduction, epileptiform discharge and hippocampal hyperactivity may have prognostic implication for AD progression. 21 , 22 , 23 The finding of MF reorganization in PART and ADNC brains prompted us to explore whether hippocampal metabolic alteration is also a shared feature with MTLE, by assessing COX expression. 25 , 73 The temporal lobe sections allowed us to measure the o.d. in the hippocampus and PHG neocortex with identical staining conditions. The specific COX o.d. in CA2‐Sub appeared to be increased in the PART (1a–IV/0) and early ADNC (II–IV/1) groups relative to controls (0/0), with a significant drop in the ADNC group with hippocampal Aβ plaques (II–VI/2–4). The CA2‐Sub/PHG o.d. ratio was significantly higher in the PART and early ADNC groups relative to controls. Further, COX‐specific o.d. in the PHG neocortex tended to reduce in the II to VI/2 to 4 group relative to other groups. These data suggest a hypermetabolic trend in CA2 to Sub in PART and ADNC cases without hippocampal Aβ plaques. However, a hypometabolic state appears to occur in the hippocampus and neocortex with the increase of Aβ plaque pathology in the brain.

In summary, the present study detected early‐onset but extensive aberrant αSMA expression in the hippocampus in post mortem human brains with PART and ADNC. αSMA‐labeled dystrophic neurites could occur at TANCs and neuritic plaques in the hippocampal and subicular subregions and co‐express amyloidogenic markers. It appears that MF reorganization occurs along but integrating with tangle and plaque development in human hippocampal formations. In addition, we observed increased COX immunolabeling in CA2 to Sub in the brain groups with PART and ADNC at the neocortical stage of amyloidosis, pointing to an existence of mitoenergetic alteration during AD pathogenesis.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information.

CONSENT STATEMENT

This study did not involve human participants or the use of identifiable live human data; therefore, consent was not necessary.

Supporting information

Supporting Information

Supporting Information

Supporting Information

Supporting Information

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank De Hu and Ming‐Li Zhang for microscopical image scanning. This study was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology of China (grants #2021ZD0201103 and #2021ZD02018 to X.X.Y.) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (#82201595 to T.T.).


REFERENCES

1 Nielson DM , Smith TA , Sreekumar V , Dennis S , Sederberg PB . Human hippocampus represents space and time during retrieval of real‐world memories. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(35):11078‐11083. doi:10.1073/pnas.1507104112``26283350 PMC4568259
2 Hainmueller T , Bartos M . Dentate gyrus circuits for encoding, retrieval and discrimination of episodic memories. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2020;21(3):153‐168. doi:10.1038/s41583-019-0260-z 32042144 PMC7115869
3 Braak H , Braak E . Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer‐related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 1991;82(4):239‐259. doi:10.1007/BF00308809 1759558
4 Thal DR , Rüb U , Orantes M , Braak H . Phases of A beta‐deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD. Neurology. 2002;58(12):1791‐1800. doi:10.1212/WNL.58.12.1791 12084879
5 Crary JF , Trojanowski JQ , Schneider JA , et al. Primary age‐related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging. Acta Neuropathol. 2014;128(6):755‐766. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1349-0 25348064 PMC4257842
6 Braak H , Mayer B , Feldengut S , Schön M , Del Tredici K . Sequence and trajectory of early Alzheimer's disease‐related tau inclusions in the hippocampal formation of cases without amyloid‐β deposits. Acta Neuropathol. 2025;149(1):50. doi:10.1007/s00401-025-02862-x 40407905 PMC12102137
7 Vossel KA , Tartaglia MC , Nygaard HB , Zeman AZ , Miller BL . Epileptic activity in Alzheimer's disease: causes and clinical relevance. Lancet Neurol. 2017;16(4):311‐322. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30044-3 28327340 PMC5973551
8 Lam AD , Cole AJ , Cash SS . New approaches to studying silent mesial temporal lobe seizures in Alzheimer's disease. Front Neurol. 2019;10:959. doi:10.3389/fneur.2019.00959 31551916 PMC6737997
9 Vossel KA , Ranasinghe KG , Beagle AJ , et al. Incidence and impact of subclinical epileptiform activity in Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol. 2016;80(6):858‐870. doi:10.1002/ana.24794 27696483 PMC5177487
10 Lam AD , Maus D , Zafar SF , Cole AJ , Cash SS . SCOPE‐mTL: a non‐invasive tool for identifying and lateralizing mesial temporal lobe seizures prior to scalp EEG ictal onset. Clin Neurophysiol. 2017;128(9):1647‐1655. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2017.06.040 28732342 PMC5564454
11 Devulder A , Vanderlinden G , Van Langenhoven L , et al. Epileptic activity on foramen ovale electrodes is associated with sleep and tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease. Brain. 2025;148(2):506‐520. doi:10.1093/brain/awae231 38990981 PMC11788210
12 Huijbers W , Schultz AP , Papp KV , et al. Tau accumulation in clinically normal older adults is associated with hippocampal hyperactivity. J Neurosci. 2019;39(3):548‐556. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1397-18.2018 30482786 PMC6335746
13 Targa Dias Anastacio H, Matosin N , Ooi L . Neuronal hyperexcitability in Alzheimer's disease: what are the drivers behind this aberrant phenotype?. Transl Psychiatry. 2022;12(1):257.35732622 10.1038/s41398-022-02024-7 PMC9217953
14 Horvath AA , Csernus EA , Lality S , Kaminski RM , Kamondi A . Inhibiting epileptiform activity in cognitive disorders: possibilities for a Novel Therapeutic Approach. Front Neurosci. 2020;14:557416. doi:10.3389/fnins.2020.557416 33177974 PMC7593384
15 Johnson SC , Baxter LC , Susskind‐Wilder L , Connor DJ , Sabbagh MN , Caselli RJ . Hippocampal adaptation to face repetition in healthy elderly and mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia. 2004;42(7):980‐989. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.11.015 14998712
16 Kircher TT , Weis S , Freymann K , et al. Hippocampal activation in patients with mild cognitive impairment is necessary for successful memory encoding. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78(8):812‐818. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2006.104877 17287238 PMC2117738
17 Quiroz YT , Budson AE , Celone K , et al. Hippocampal hyperactivation in presymptomatic familial Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol. 2010;68(6):865‐875. doi:10.1002/ana.22105 21194156 PMC3175143
18 Bookheimer SY , Strojwas MH , Cohen MS , et al. Patterns of brain activation in people at risk for Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(7):450‐456. doi:10.1056/NEJM200008173430701 10944562 PMC2831477
19 Johnson SC , Schmitz TW , Trivedi MA , et al. The influence of Alzheimer disease family history and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 on mesial temporal lobe activation. J Neurosci. 2006;26(22):6069‐6076. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0959-06.2006 16738250 PMC2684824
20 Richter N , Bischof GN , Dronse J , et al. Entorhinal tau predicts hippocampal activation and memory deficits in Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(4):1601‐1614. doi:10.3233/JAD-200835 33164934
21 Barbour AJ . Screening antiseizure medications to break the cycle between neuronal hyperexcitability and Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2025;107(3):994‐996.40754800 10.1177/13872877251364556 PMC12449591
22 Vossel K , Johnson EL , Cretin B , Matsumoto R . Epileptic activity in Alzheimer's disease: emerging insights and therapeutic implications. Lancet Neurol. 2026;25(3):294‐307. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(25)00425-9 41581519
23 Yokoi K , Tsujimoto M , Suzuki K , et al. Antiseizure therapy attenuates cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease: a retrospective cohort study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2026;110(1):227‐241. doi:10.1177/13872877251414147 41568929
24 Tu T , Cai XL , Sun ZP , et al. Mossy fiber expression of αSMA in human hippocampus and its relevance to brain evolution and neuronal development. Sci Rep. 2025;15(1):15834. doi:10.1038/s41598-025-00094-3 40328887 PMC12056149
25 Tu T , Wan L , Zhang QL , et al. Putative long range mossy fiber sprouting and regional cytochrome c oxidase alteration in the hippocampus of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Sci Rep. 2026;16(1):5232. doi:10.1038/s41598-026-36148-3 41535456 PMC12881434
26 Yan XX , Ma C , Bao AM , Wang XM , Gai WP . Brain banking as a cornerstone of neuroscience in China. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14(2):136. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70259-5 25772887
27 Qiu W , Zhang H , Bao A , et al. Standardized operational protocol for human brain banking in china. Neurosci Bull. 2019;35(2):270‐276. doi:10.1007/s12264-018-0306-7 30411305 PMC6426885
28 Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Kretzschmar H , Del Tredici K . Staging of Alzheimer disease‐associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry. Acta Neuropathol. 2006;112(4):389‐404. doi:10.1007/s00401-006-0127-z 16906426 PMC3906709
29 Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG , et al. National institute on aging‐Alzheimer's association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease: a practical approach. Acta Neuropathol. 2012;123(1):1‐11. doi:10.1007/s00401-011-0910-3 22101365 PMC3268003
30 Thal D , Poesen K , Vandenberghe R , De Meyer S . Alzheimer's disease neuropathology and its estimation with fluid and imaging biomarkers. Mol Neurodegener. 2025;20(1):33. doi:10.1186/s13024-025-00819-y 40087672 PMC11907863
31 Zhang QL , Wang J , Zhang XJ , et al. Brain samples from the central south university Xiangya human brain bank. Acta Anatomica Sinica. 2026;57(3):280‐289.
32 Tu T , Jiang J , Zhang QL , et al. Extracellular sortilin proteopathy relative to β‐amyloid and tau in aged and Alzheimer's disease human brains. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020;12:93. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2020.00093 32477092 PMC7236809
33 Yang C , Sun ZP , Jiang J , et al. Increased expression of the proapoptotic presenilin associated protein is involved in neuronal tangle formation in human brain. Sci Rep. 2024;14(1):25274. doi:10.1038/s41598-024-77026-0 39455681 PMC11512019
34 Fu H , Tu P , Zhao L , Dai J , Liu B , Cui M . Amyloid‐β deposits target efficient near‐infrared fluorescent probes: synthesis, in vitro evaluation, and in vivo imaging. Anal Chem. 2016;88(3):1944‐1950. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04441 26717442
35 Xie T , Li Y , Tian C , et al. Fused cycloheptatriene‐BODIPY is a high‐performance near‐infrared probe to image tau tangles. J Med Chem. 2022;65(21):14527‐14538. doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00859 36283122
36 Cammarata S , Mancardi G , Tabaton M . Formic acid treatment exposes hidden neurofilament and tau epitopes in abnormal cytoskeletal filaments from patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and Alzheimer's disease. Neurosci Lett. 1990;115(2):351‐355. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(90)90481-N 1700345
37 Ai JQ , Luo R , Tu T , et al. Doublecortin‐expressing neurons in Chinese tree shrew forebrain exhibit mixed rodent and primate‐like topographic characteristics. Front Neuroanat. 2021;15:727883. doi:10.3389/fnana.2021.727883 34602987 PMC8481370
38 Li YN , Hu DD , Cai XL , et al. Doublecortin‐expressing neurons in human cerebral cortex layer II and amygdala from infancy to 100 years old. Mol Neurobiol. 2023;60(6):3464‐3485. doi:10.1007/s12035-023-03261-7 36879137
39 Munoz DG , Wang D . Tangle‐associated neuritic clusters. A new lesion in Alzheimer's disease and aging suggests that aggregates of dystrophic neurites are not necessarily associated with beta/A4. Am J Pathol. 1992;140(5):1167‐1178.1580329 PMC1886509
40 Hyman BT , Van Hoesen GW , Beyreuther K , Masters CL . A4 amyloid protein immunoreactivity is present in Alzheimer's disease neurofibrillary tangles. Neurosci Lett. 1989;101(3):352‐355. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(89)90559-4 2671814
41 Perry G . Neuritic plaques in Alzheimer disease originate from neurofibrillary tangles. Med Hypotheses. 1993;40(4):257‐258. doi:10.1016/0306-9877(93)90051-Q 8321160
42 Arima K , Nakamura M , Sunohara N , et al. Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural characterization of neuritic clusters around ghost tangles in the hippocampal formation in progressive supranuclear palsy brains. Acta Neuropathol. 1999;97(6):565‐576. doi:10.1007/s004010051032 10378375
43 Probst A , Ulrich J , Heitz PU . Senile dementia of Alzheimer type: astroglial reaction to extracellular neurofibrillary tangles in the hippocampus. An immunocytochemical and electron‐microscopic study. Acta Neuropathol. 1982;57(1):75‐79. doi:10.1007/BF00688880 7090745
44 Yamaguchi H , Morimatsu M , Hirai S , Takahashi K . Alzheimer's neurofibrillary tangles are penetrated by astroglial processes and appear eosinophilic in their final stages. Acta Neuropathol. 1987;72(3):214‐217. doi:10.1007/BF00691092 2436433
45 Cai Y , Zhang XM , Macklin LN , et al. BACE1 elevation is involved in amyloid plaque development in the triple transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease: differential Aβ antibody labeling of early‐onset axon terminal pathology. Neurotox Res. 2012;21(2):160‐174. doi:10.1007/s12640-011-9256-9 21725719 PMC3227764
46 Zhang XM , Cai Y , Xiong K , et al. Beta‐secretase‐1 elevation in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease is associated with synaptic/axonal pathology and amyloidogenesis: implications for neuritic plaque development. Eur J Neurosci. 2009;30(12):2271‐2283. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.07017.x 20092570 PMC2869535
47 Wang Y , Sun ZP , Zhou P , et al. Early‐onset axonal pathology and β‐amyloidosis in human brains with hematological malignances and cardiovascular diseases. Neuroscience. 2026;614:1‐19. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2026.03.032 41876055
48 Schwab C , Akiyama H , McGeer EG , McGeer PL . Extracellular neurofibrillary tangles are immunopositive for the 40 carboxy‐terminal sequence of beta‐amyloid protein. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1998;57(12):1131‐1137. doi:10.1097/00005072-199812000-00004 9862635
49 Lacosta AM , Insua D , Badi H , Pesini P , Sarasa M . Neurofibrillary tangles of Aβx‐40 in Alzheimer's disease brains. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;58(3):661‐667. doi:10.3233/JAD-170163 28453491
50 Nie F , Wong‐Riley MT . Double labeling of GABA and cytochrome oxidase in the macaque visual cortex: quantitative EM analysis. J Comp Neurol. 1995;356(1):115‐131. doi:10.1002/cne.903560108 7629306
51 Cai Y , Xiong K , Zhang XM , et al. β‐Secretase‐1 elevation in aged monkey and Alzheimer's disease human cerebral cortex occurs around the vasculature in partnership with multisystem axon terminal pathogenesis and β‐amyloid accumulation. Eur J Neurosci. 2010;32(7):1223‐1238. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07376.x 20726888 PMC2970759
52 Wenzel HJ , Cole TB , Born DE , Schwartzkroin PA , RD P . Ultrastructural localization of zinc transporter‐3 (ZnT‐3) to synaptic vesicle membranes within mossy fiber boutons in the hippocampus of mouse and monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94(23):12676‐12681. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.23.12676 9356509 PMC25081
53 Zhang N , Houser CR . Ultrastructural localization of dynorphin in the dentate gyrus in human temporal lobe epilepsy: a study of reorganized mossy fiber synapses. J Comp Neurol. 1999;405(4):472‐490. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19990322)405:4<472::AID-CNE3>3.0.CO;2-P 10098940
54 Freiman TM , Häussler U , Zentner J , et al. Mossy fiber sprouting into the hippocampal region CA2 in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. Hippocampus. 2021;31(6):580‐592. doi:10.1002/hipo.23323 33720466
55 Yan XX , Cai Y , Zhang XM , et al. BACE1 elevation is associated with aberrant limbic axonal sprouting in epileptic CD1 mice. Exp Neurol. 2012;235(1):228‐237. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.003 22265658 PMC3514910
56 Vardalaki D , Yaeger CE , Harnett MT . Silent synapses in the adult brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2025;48(1):169‐189. doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-112723-032924 39999855
57 Masters CL , Beyreuther K , Henryk M . Wisniewski and the amyloid theory of Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2001;3(1):83‐86. doi:10.3233/JAD-2001-3112 12214076
58 Fiala JC . Mechanisms of amyloid plaque pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 2007;114(6):551‐571. doi:10.1007/s00401-007-0284-8 17805553
59 García‐Marín V , García‐López P , Freire M . Cajal's contributions to the study of Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007;12(2):161‐174.17917161 10.3233/jad-2007-12206
60 Goedert M . Oskar Fischer and the study of dementia. Brain. 2009;132(Pt 4):1102‐1111.18952676 10.1093/brain/awn256 PMC2668940
61 Vande Weghe J , Cras P , Kawai M , et al. Dystrophic neurites infiltrate extracellular neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer disease. Brain Res. 1991;560(1‐2):303‐305.1760735 10.1016/0006-8993(91)91247-x
62 Yasuhara O , Kawamata T , Aimi Y , McGeer EG , McGeer PL . Two types of dystrophic neurites in senile plaques of Alzheimer disease and elderly non‐demented cases. Neurosci Lett. 1994;171(1‐2):73‐76. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(94)90608-4 8084503
63 Thal DR , Härtig W , Schober R . Stage‐correlated distribution of type 1 and 2 dystrophic neurites in cortical and hippocampal plaques in Alzheimer's disease. J Hirnforsch. 1998;39(2):175‐181.10022341
64 Wang X , Zhu K , Wu W , et al. Prevalence of mixed neuropathologies in age‐related neurodegenerative diseases: a community‐based autopsy study in China. Alzheimers Dement. 2025;21(1):e14369. doi:10.1002/alz.14369 39582417 PMC11782840
65 Walker LC , Kitt CA , Cork LC , Struble RG , Dellovade TL , Price DL . Multiple transmitter systems contribute neurites to individual senile plaques. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1988;47(2):138‐144. doi:10.1097/00005072-198803000-00006 2828554 PMC11223644
66 Thierry M , Boluda S , Delatour B , et al. Human subiculo‐fornico‐mamillary system in Alzheimer's disease: tau seeding by the pillar of the fornix. Acta Neuropathol. 2020;139(3):443‐461. doi:10.1007/s00401-019-02108-7 31822997
67 Christensen KR , Beach TG , Serrano GE , Kanaan NM . Pathogenic tau modifications occur in axons before the somatodendritic compartment in mossy fiber and Schaffer collateral pathways. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019;7(1):29. doi:10.1186/s40478-019-0675-9 30819250 PMC6394076
68 Jordà‐Siquier T , Petrel M , Kouskoff V , et al. APP accumulates with presynaptic proteins around amyloid plaques: a role for presynaptic mechanisms in Alzheimer's disease?. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18(11):2099‐2116. doi:10.1002/alz.12546 35076178 PMC9786597
69 Lazarov O , Lee M , Peterson DA , Sisodia SS . Evidence that synaptically released beta‐amyloid accumulates as extracellular deposits in the hippocampus of transgenic mice. J Neurosci. 2002;22(22):9785‐9793. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09785.2002 12427834 PMC6757836
70 Wisniewski HM , Terry RD . Reexamination of the pathogenesis of the senile plaque. In: Zimmerman HM , ed. Progress in Neuropathology. Grune & Stratton; 1973:1‐26.
71 Hunter S , Walsh S , Brayne C . Key questions for the future of amyloid research in dementia: a framework for integrating complex datasets. Mol Psychiatry. 2025;30(10):5001‐5010. doi:10.1038/s41380-025-03156-0 40847003 PMC12436173
72 Gilbert PE , Brushfield AM . The role of the CA3 hippocampal subregion in spatial memory: a process oriented behavioral assessment. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009;33(5):774‐781. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.03.037 19375477 PMC2743458
73 Kalyvas AC , Dimitriou M , Ioannidis P , Grigoriadis N , Afrantou T . Alzheimer's disease and epilepsy: exploring shared pathways and promising biomarkers for future treatments. J Clin Med. 2024;13(13):3879. doi:10.3390/jcm13133879 38999445 PMC11242231
