
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Bioact Mater
Journal ID: Bioact Mater
NLM Journal ID: 101685294

Bioactive Materials

EISSN: 2452-199X
Publisher: KeAi Publishing

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13499525
PMID: 42633435
DOI: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2026.08.012
Article ID: S2452-199X(26)00475-5
Article version: 1
Subjects: Article

Photothermal-magnetic dual-activated Janus dressing for microenvironment purification and wireless electrically triggered healing with reduced scar formation

Zhou Fengkai a b c
Zhao Wenshuo a b c
Zhu Ziyue a b c
Wang Shasha a b c
Tang Liqin a b c
Shan Mengqi a b c
Zhang Qian qianzhang@dhu.edu.cn d ⁎
Wang Fujun a b c
Wang Guixue e
Wang Lu a b c
Mao Jifu jifu.mao@dhu.edu.cn a b c ⁎⁎
a Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Advanced Textiles, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China
b Key Laboratory of Textile Science & Technology, Ministry of Education, College of Textiles, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China
c Key Laboratory of Textile Industry for Biomedical Textile Materials and Technology, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China
d College of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China
e Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Biorheological and Technology, National Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Vascular Implants, Bioengineering College of Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China
⁎ Corresponding author. qianzhang@dhu.edu.cn⁎⁎ Corresponding author. Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Advanced Textiles, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China. jifu.mao@dhu.edu.cn
Publication date: 2027 Jan
Electronic publication date: 2026 Aug 15
Volume: 67
First page: 477
Last page: 496
Received 2026 May 7; Revised 2026 Jul 27; Accepted 2026 Aug 6
Copyright: © 2026 The Authors
Copyright year: 2026
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: Electroactive Janus dressing, Wound scar inhibition, Wireless electrical stimulation, Photothermal therapy, Antibacterial

==============================
Hypertrophic scarring remains a major clinical challenge that impedes functional wound regeneration. Although electrical stimulation (ES) shows great promise in activating endogenous repair pathways and suppressing fibrosis, excessive exudate and bacterial infection in chronic wounds not only exacerbate inflammation but also disrupt interfacial electrical contact, thereby attenuating the efficacy of in situ–generated ES. To address this, we designed an electroactive and antibacterial Janus dressing that integrated active microenvironmental purification with wireless ES, ultimately inhibiting scar formation during wound healing. The dressing featured electroactive cotton gauze with asymmetric wettability, achieved via SiO2 and AgNPs@poly 5-hydroxytryptamine/polyethyleneimine (AgNPs@PHT/PEI) coatings to form a unidirectional fluidic gate. Enhanced by a near-infrared–driven mild photothermal effect, this design enabled rapid exudate pumping and evaporation while achieving > 99% antibacterial efficacy within 15 min. Leveraging electromagnetic induction, it delivered tunable wireless microcurrents (13.44–43.18 μA) that upregulated endogenous fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) secretion, which contributes to the downregulation of TGF-β1-driven myofibroblast activation, as evidenced by reduced α-SMA expression. This strategy achieved 99.37% closure of large infected full-thickness rat wounds, featuring highly ordered collagen remodeling. Collectively, this study presents an innovative platform for rapid healing and scar inhibition in chronic wounds, holding promise for broader applications in mitigating fibrotic disorders.

Graphical abstract

Highlights

• Electroactive Janus dressing formed a unidirectional gate via SiO2/AgNPs@PHT/PEI.

• NIR-driven photothermal effect achieved rapid exudate pumping and >99% antibiosis.

• Tunable wireless microcurrents were delivered via electromagnetic induction.

• Microcurrents upregulated FGF2, inhibiting myofibroblast differentiation.

• Janus dressing integrated microenvironment purification and ES to inhibit scarring.

1 Introduction

Hypertrophic scarring represents a significant global health burden, fundamentally driven by the hypersensitivity of fibroblasts to transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) [1,2]. While TGF-β1 activation is essential for initial wound contraction, its continuous signaling locks fibroblasts into a persistent myofibroblast phenotype, leading to pathological collagen deposition and impaired tissue remodeling [[3], [4], [5]]. To break this fibrotic loop, downregulating TGF-β1 via natural antagonists, such as fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), has emerged as a primary therapeutic target [6]. Currently, the clinical strategy heavily relies on the exogenous supplementation of FGF2 [7]. However, this biochemical approach is severely compromised by the inherent instability, rapid degradation, and burst-release kinetics of exogenous proteins [[8], [9], [10], [11]]. To maintain effective therapeutic concentrations, high-dose administrations are often required, which not only pose a risk of aberrant cell proliferation but also fail to recapitulate the precise spatiotemporal dynamics of endogenous wound healing [12,13]. Therefore, shifting from uncontrollable exogenous delivery to the controlled in situ elicitation of endogenous FGF2 remains a critical challenge in achieving scar inhibition during wound healing.

Electrical stimulation (ES) has emerged as an effective physical modality to directly modulate membrane potential, govern cell behaviors, and awaken endogenous reparative factors like FGF2 [14]. However, the chronic wound bed is a highly dynamic and complex microenvironment [15]. The excessive accumulation of exudate not only breeds severe bacterial infection and persistent inflammatory responses but also alters the interfacial tissue impedance [6,16,17]. The disruption of this microenvironment severely impedes electrical signal transduction, thereby greatly compromising the precision of ES in directing cellular behavior and therapeutic efficacy [18]. Moreover, conventional ES strategies rely on cumbersome external power sources and rigid electrodes, resulting in high costs and poor comfort [19,20]. Therefore, a truly effective ES platform must couple with active microenvironment intervention targeting excessive exudate and bacterial burden.

Herein, we report a wireless, electroactive, and antibacterial Janus dressing that promotes scar-inhibited wound healing through exudate management, bacterial elimination, and electrically triggered bioactivity. Driven by clinical translation needs, commercial gauze was converted into an electroactive matrix via in situ polymerization of dopamine and pyrrole, and further engineered into an asymmetric Janus architecture by means of biomimetic strategies. Drawing inspiration from plant transpiration, we utilized a hydrophobic silica-modified bottom layer as a unidirectional conduit to continuously transport exudate to the hydrophilic and antibacterial top layer functionalized with AgNPs@poly 5-hydroxytryptamine/polyethyleneimine (AgNPs@PHT/PEI) (Fig. 1a). Critically, coupled with near-infrared (NIR)-activated low-temperature photothermal therapy, the dressing achieved rapid exudate evaporation (0.942 kg m−2 h−1) and efficient bacterial elimination (>99% within 15 min), thereby mitigating local inflammation. Benefiting from its high conductivity, the dressing enabled stable generation of tunable wireless microcurrents (13.44–43.18 μA) via electromagnetic induction. Under an optimized magnetic field, the resulting ES effectively modulated cellular activities and accelerated tissue regeneration (Fig. 1b). In an infected full-thickness skin defect rat model, this multiphasic strategy yielded a wound closure rate of 99.37 ± 1.10% by day 35 without scar formation, significantly outperforming the control group. Functionally, the in situ–generated ES from the dressing upregulated endogenous FGF2 secretion, which was associated with the downregulation of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) expression. This regulatory cascade effectively inhibited pathological myofibroblast differentiation and supported organized collagen remodeling, ultimately contributing to scar inhibition during wound healing (Fig. 1c). Collectively, this study presents an integrated wound dressing platform that combines active microenvironment management with controlled ES, offering a promising approach for mitigating fibrotic disorders.Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the mechanism. (a) The design of the Janus dressing and 808 nm NIR irradiation enhances the unidirectional water transport and antibacterial properties. (b) The Janus dressing generates wireless currents via electromagnetic induction to regulate fibroblast proliferation and differentiation. (c) The electroactive Janus dressing promotes rapid healing and inhibits scar formation via combined microenvironment modulation and wireless ES.

2 Results and discussion

2.1 Design and structural characterization of the Janus dressing

To achieve an integrated therapeutic platform that incorporates unidirectional exudate wicking, bactericidal activity, and wireless ES, we rationally designed a hierarchical electroactive Janus dressing. Commercial cotton gauze (CG) was selected as the structural skeleton due to its inherent hygroscopicity and breathability. To endow the substrate with great electrical conductivity while maintaining its original properties, an electroactive network was constructed via the in situ polymerization of pyrrole. In addition, to ensure robust interfacial adhesion and optimal doping of the polypyrrole (PPy) layer, a bio-inspired polydopamine (PDA) primer was pre-polymerized on the fibers (Fig. 2a) [[21], [22], [23]]. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CG@PDA (CPDA) reveal that PDA formed a uniform and continuous coating on the cotton surface (Fig. S1). After PPy deposition, SEM images of CPDA@PPy (CPP) show that PPy formed a coating composed of nanoparticles on the fiber surface (Fig. 2b and c).Fig. 2 Construction and characterization of the Janus dressing. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of CPP, the electroactive substrate of the Janus dressing. (b, c) SEM images of CPP at different magnifications. (d) Schematic illustration of the construction of the hydrophobic side in the Janus dressing. (e, f) SEM images of hydrophobic CPPS at different magnifications. (g) Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mappings on the CPPS surface. (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the hydrophilic side of the Janus dressing. (i, j) SEM images of the hydrophilic CPP@AgNPs@PHT/PEI (CPPAP) dressing at different magnifications. (k) EDS elemental mappings of the CPPAP surface. (l) EDS elemental mappings and Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of AgNPs@PHT/PEI. (m) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the Janus dressing. (n, o) Cross-sectional SEM images and EDS elemental mappings of Ag and Si of the Janus dressing. (p) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and (q) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the dressings. High-resolution XPS spectra of (r) Si 2p for CPPS and (s) Ag 3d for CPPAP. (t) Quantitative analysis of Si and Ag in the Janus dressing (n = 3). Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

To achieve the asymmetry required for unidirectional fluidic management, CPP was differentially functionalized to create distinct wound-facing (CPPS) and air-facing layers (CPPAP). For CPPS, hydrophobic modified SiO2 nanoparticles were introduced (Fig. 2d). SEM and EDS elemental mapping indicated that the fiber surface became denser after hydrophobic SiO2 treatment, eliminating the gaps between PPy nanoparticles and providing a uniform distribution of Si elements for the hydrophobic gating effect (Fig. 2e–g). Conversely, CPPAP was designed to be a hydrophilic and antibacterial sink through AgNPs@PHT/PEI surface modification (Fig. 2h) [24]. Here, PEI not only facilitates the enhancement of the dressing's antibacterial activity through its strong positive charge, but also captures Ag+ via the coordination complexation between its amine groups and Ag+ [25]. Meanwhile, 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) exhibits strong reducing power during oxidative polymerization, rapidly converting Ag+ into AgNPs [26]. Consequently, SEM images revealed the obvious topographical evolution of the CPPAP surface, where larger AgNPs@PHT/PEI particles covered the underlying PPy nanoparticles (Fig. 2i and j). The corresponding EDS elemental mapping confirms the presence of abundant Ag elements on the surface (Fig. 2k). TEM images further validated the successful modification, revealing a lattice fringe spacing of 0.238 nm, corresponding to the Ag plane, with the nanoparticles intimately encapsulated by PHT and PEI (Fig. 2l) [26]. Furthermore, the definitive asymmetric Janus architecture was assembled by integrating the CPPS and CPPAP layer dressings via a scalable thermal-lamination process using a hot-melt adhesive interface (Fig. 2m). Cross-sectional SEM and EDS elemental mapping of the dressing explicitly demonstrated that the adhesive completely infiltrated the cotton fibers, forming a tight mechanical bond between the functional layers without disrupting their respective spatial characteristics (Fig. 2n and o). Additionally, the assembly process had no significant effect on the thickness of the Janus dressing (Fig. S2).

The chemical identities and compositional evolution of the dressing were comprehensively validated. The XRD pattern of CPPAP showed a diffraction peak at 2θ = 38.1°, corresponding to the (111) crystal plane of Ag (Fig. 2p) [26,27]. This was consistent with the TEM results and further confirms the successful deposition of AgNPs on the dressing. XPS further elucidated the surface chemistry. The characteristic S 2p peak in the XPS spectrum confirms the doping of 5-sulfosalicylate anion in PPy (Fig. 2q) [28]. The N 1s spectra show that the -NH+- content in CPP is as high as 35.01%, which slightly decreases to 33.75% in CPPS, and significantly drops to 22.07% in CPPAP (Fig. S3). This may be attributed to the fact that the solvent for the hydrophobic agent is alcohol, and short-term contact causes minimal damage to PPy. In contrast, the polymerization of AgNPs@PHT/PEI required weakly alkaline conditions (pH = 8.5) and a prolonged reaction time, leading to the dedoping of Cl− and 5-sulfosalicylate anion from PPy and resulting in a marked decrease in -NH+- content [22]. The Si 2p spectrum of CPPS exhibits a distinct characteristic peak near 102.8 eV, which is associated with SiO2 (Fig. 2r) [29]. The Ag 3d spectrum of CPPAP shows prominent peaks at 368.09 eV and 374.08 eV, indicating that Ag(0) is the predominant component, while peaks at 368.80 eV and 374.49 eV are attributed to Ag(+) (Fig. 2s) [26]. Notably, the interaction between PHT/PEI and Ag+ caused a shift of the Ag binding energy to a lower value by 0.12 eV [26]. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) results indicate that the SiO2 content in CPPS was 35.59 ± 5.48 μg cm−2, and the Ag content in CPPAP was 5.47 ± 0.56 μg cm−2 (Fig. 2t). The above series of results collectively demonstrates the successful construction of the Janus dressing based on CPPS and CPPAP.

2.2 Mechanical properties, breathability, and wireless magnetoelectric properties of the Janus dressing

As an effective platform for intelligent wound management, a dressing must first possess a robust physical and physiological interface with the wound bed. Achieving this requires a compatibility of mechanical properties and air permeability [30]. Tensile fracture test results revealed that while individual functionalization processes reduced the breaking strength of the dressings, the thermal-lamination process significantly enhanced their mechanical strength (Fig. 4a). The resulting Janus dressing exhibited a breaking strength of 11.60 ± 0.42 MPa, outperforming CG (9.56 ± 0.22 MPa) and ensuring adequate mechanical support (Fig. S4). Despite the partial pore occlusion inherent to the hot-melt adhesive interface, the Janus dressing remained a high porosity of 72.79 ± 0.55% and a favorable air transmission rate of 3846.36 ± 14.48 mm s−1 (Fig. 3b and Fig. S5a). This gas-exchange homeostasis provided a critical physiological foundation for wound healing (Fig. S5b). Beyond providing a supportive physical barrier, the core mission of the Janus dressing was its ability to deliver wireless ES. To overcome the limitations associated with bulky, wired power sources, electromagnetic induction was exploited. The efficacy of such a wireless ES system is fundamentally governed by the conductivity of the dressing. Therefore, the conductivity of the dressings was evaluated [31]. It was observed that CPPAP (0.59 ± 0.06 S cm−1) exhibited a lower conductivity than CPP (0.79 ± 0.05 S cm−1). This reduction was attributed to the dedoping of PPy in the alkaline environment, which is consistent with the N 1s XPS spectral results (Fig. 3c and Fig. S2). The Janus dressing maintained an electrical conductivity of 0.68 ± 0.03 S cm−1 after assembly. Furthermore, owing to the favorable thermal stability of PPy, along with the short duration (10 s) and relatively low ironing temperature (130 °C), no significant difference in electrical resistance was observed before and after assembly (Fig. S6) [32,33].Fig. 3 Mechanical properties, air permeability, and magnetoelectric characterization. (a) Tensile stress-strain curves, (b) air permeability (n = 3), and (c) conductivity of the dressings (n = 3). (d) Schematic illustration of the wireless microcurrent generation in the dressing based on electromagnetic induction. (e) Currents generated by different dressings at 600 rpm. (f) Current and (g) voltage of the Janus dressing at different rotational speeds. (h) ANSYS simulation analysis of the magnetic field distribution around the dressing and the current distribution on the dressing. (i) ANSYS simulation analysis of the current output performance of different dressings. (j) Stability test of the current output. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

Fig. 4 Unidirectional fluid transport performance. (a, b) Contact angles of the hydrophobic CPPS and hydrophilic CPPAP layers. (c, d) Wetting behavior of water droplets on the CPPS and CPPAP layers. (e, f) Anti-gravity liquid transport of the Janus dressing under different assembly configurations. (g) Schematic of the unidirectional transport mechanism. (h) Anti-gravity transport of bacterial suspension.

The well-preserved conductivity of the Janus dressing provided the essential prerequisite for constructing a highly tunable, wireless magnetoelectric system [14]. A rotating magnetic field system with adjustable intensity and frequency was constructed by coupling a motor-driven rotating magnet (Fig. 3d). Adjusting the distance between the magnet and the dressing allowed for the regulation of magnetic field intensity. At a distance of 1.5 cm, the magnetic field intensity on the dressing surface reached 90 mT, which falls within the safe range for the human body (Fig. S7) [34,35]. Unless otherwise specified, the magnetic field intensity was set at 90 mT. Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction provides the formula for calculating the induced current (I):(1) I=ER=−nSΔBRΔt

where E, R, n, S, and ΔB/Δt represent the induced electromotive force, the resistance of the material, the number of coil turns, the cross-sectional area of the closed loop, and the rate of change of magnetic flux density, respectively [36]. The magnitude of the induced current is strongly correlated with the resistance (R) of the dressing and the rate of change of magnetic flux density (ΔB/Δt). Consistent with this principle, the measured current output of different dressings at 600 rpm followed a trend consistent with their electrical conductivity (Fig. 3e). Varying the rotation speed of the magnet (150–600 rpm) resulted in corresponding changes in the output current (13.44–43.18 μA) and voltage (0.23–0.61 mV) of the Janus dressing (Fig. 3f and g). The mechanism of magnetoelectric conversion was elucidated using ANSYS simulation. The simulation results demonstrated that under a rotating magnetic field, the induced current within the dressing continuously alternated direction (Fig. 3h and Movie S1) [14,37]. The simulation also confirmed that the ΔB/Δt could be regulated by changing the magnet rotation speed, thereby adjusting the output of the induced current and electromotive force (Fig. S8a–d). Similarly, the simulation verified a positive correlation between the magnitude of the current output and the electrical conductivity of the dressing (Fig. 3i). Finally, stability tests over 10,000 cycles demonstrated that the dressing could provide continuous and stable electrical stimulation for wound healing (Fig. 3j). Collectively, these results indicate that the Janus dressing possesses desirable mechanical properties, air permeability, and magnetoelectric output performance, providing a solid foundation for regulating cell behavior and promoting wound healing.

2.3 Anti-gravity transport of liquid performance of the Janus dressing

In order to evaluate the anti-gravity transport of liquid performance of the Janus dressing, the wettability contrast between the two layers of the Janus dressing was first characterized. Static contact angle measurements showed that the CPPS layer exhibited a contact angle of 119°, indicating strong hydrophobicity (Fig. 4a and Movie S2). In contrast, water droplets on the CPPAP layer absorbed within 0.5 s, demonstrating its superior hydrophilicity (Fig. 4b and Movie S3). To further evaluate liquid-dressing interactions under dynamic conditions, Rhodamine B (RhB) droplets were introduced to simulate exudate behavior. As shown in Fig. 4c, the CPPAP-assembled dressing displayed ultrafast RhB absorption behavior (<0.5 s), confirming its effective liquid uptake capability (Movie S4). Conversely, droplets remained on the surface of CPPS-assembled dressing without noticeable spreading or penetration, indicating strong liquid retention and resistance to infiltration (Fig. 4d and Movie S5).

Based on the wettability contrast, the unidirectional liquid transport performance of the Janus dressing was further investigated. When RhB droplets were added, liquid was consistently transported from the hydrophobic side to the hydrophilic side, regardless of whether the direction was against or along gravity. Notably, the hydrophobic side remained dry throughout the process, while no reverse transport from the hydrophilic to the hydrophobic side was observed (Fig. 4e, f, Fig. S9, and Movies S6–S9). This anti-gravity self-pumping phenomenon can be attributed to the presence of numerous hydrophobic-hydrophilic contact points within the Janus dressing. When a droplet passed through the hydrophobic CPPS fibers and contacted the hydrophilic CPPAP fibers at these points, the hydrophilic fibers generated a wetting force (Fw) that continuously draws liquid from the hydrophobic side (Fig. 4g) [38]. Fw can be calculated using the following formula:(2) Fw=γncosθ

Where γ represents the surface tension of the liquid, n is the side length of the contact point, and θ denotes the static contact angle of the liquid on the fiber. As a result, when applied with the hydrophobic side facing the wound, the dressing effectively drains exudate away from the wound bed. Furthermore, bacterial suspension experiments showed that bacterial suspension could be directly transported into the hydrophilic antibacterial layer but could not penetrate back to the wound side (Fig. 4h and Fig. S10a and b). This selective transport behavior highlights the dressing's ability to confine bacteria and reduce infection risk.

Despite efficient unidirectional exudate transport, continuous exudate accumulation may eventually lead to saturation, increasing the risks of fluid backflow and compromising antibacterial and ES efficacy [39,40]. To address this limitation, NIR light activation was further involved due to the existence of NIR-responsive PPy and PDA within the dressings [[41], [42], [43]]. UV-Vis-NIR spectroscopy confirmed that the modified dressing showed obvious absorption in the NIR region, particularly at 808 nm (Fig. 5a). Under laser irradiation (0.2 W cm−2), the Janus dressing heated up to a stable 45 °C within 150 s, achieving uniform temperature elevation across both layers (Fig. 5b and Fig. S11a and b). However, the control group showed a negligible temperature increase (1.03 ± 0.31 °C) (Fig. 5c). Under different laser power densities, the temperature of the Janus dressing rapidly rose to a plateau and subsequently remained stable (Fig. 5d). Higher power densities resulted in faster heating rates and higher equilibrium temperatures, demonstrating that the photothermal temperature of the Janus dressing can be effectively regulated by adjusting the laser irradiation power. To balance effective antibacterial activity, exudate evaporation, and avoidance of thermal safety risks, the NIR irradiation intensity in subsequent studies was selected as 0.2 W cm−2 to achieve a therapeutic temperature of approximately 45 °C [41,44]. Mass loss measurements as a function of irradiation time indicated that, although the favorable photothermal performance of CPPS, its inability to transport liquid hindered evaporation (Fig. S12). In contrast, the Janus dressing achieved a maximum evaporation rate of 0.942 kg m−2 h−1, which was significantly higher than that of unmodified CG (0.18 kg m−2 h−1) (Fig. 5e). Without laser irradiation, the mass change of the Janus dressing was 0.187 kg m−2, which was higher than that of the CG and CG NIR groups (−0.153 and −0.152 kg m−2) (Fig. 5f). Upon NIR irradiation, the Janus NIR group exhibited a significant mass loss (−0.866 kg m−2), demonstrating that NIR enhanced the unidirectional liquid drainage performance of the Janus dressing. Furthermore, photothermal cyclic stability experiments demonstrated that the Janus dressing maintained good light responsiveness, achieving stable, rapid heating and cooling cycles (Fig. 5g). In summary, these results demonstrated that the Janus dressing possessed superior photothermal-driven evaporation performance, effectively reducing fluid accumulation and enhancing efficient liquid excretion (Fig. 5h).Fig. 5 Characterization of photothermal and antibacterial properties. (a) Vis-NIR absorption spectra of the different dressings. (b) Temperature change curves and (c) relative temperature changes of different dressings under 808 nm NIR irradiation at a power density of 0.2 W cm−2 (n = 3). (d) Temperature changes of the Janus dressing under 808 nm NIR irradiation at different power densities. (e) Evaporation rates of different dressings under 808 nm NIR irradiation at 0.2 W cm−2. (f) Mass changes of the dressing with or without laser irradiation. (g) Photothermal cycling stability of the Janus dressing. (h) 808 nm NIR photothermal-promoted volatilization and transport of exudate by the dressing. (i) Infrared thermal images of bacterial suspension on the dressing surface at different time points under 808 nm NIR irradiation at 0.2 W cm−2. (j) Colony formation assay of bacterial suspensions treated by different dressings on agar plates. Relative viability of (k) S. aureus and (l) E. coli (n = 3). (m) SEM images of bacteria treated with different dressings (the arrow indicates the damaged cell wall). (n) Schematic illustration of the antibacterial mechanism of the Janus dressing under 808 nm NIR irradiation. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

The photothermal properties also remarkably improved the dressing's antibacterial performance. Under laser irradiation, the temperature of the bacterial suspension on the CG surface gradually decreased to 22.6 °C within 15 min (Fig. 5i). In contrast, due to its great photothermal performance, the Janus dressing increased the temperature of the bacterial suspension from 36.2 °C to 45.1 °C. Consequently, agar plate assays showed a reduction in bacterial colonies for the photothermal groups, with no detectable colonies observed in the CPPAP and Janus groups (Fig. 5j). Quantitative viability assays further confirmed this trend. After laser irradiation, the relative viability of S. aureus and E. coli on the CG dressing remained at 96.82 ± 3.48% and 95.23 ± 3.33%, respectively (Fig. 5k and l). For the CPP dressing, viability decreased from 95.05 ± 2.78% and 98.33 ± 1.68% to 23.16 ± 0.94% and 53.95 ± 7.14%, respectively, indicating that photothermal antibacterial therapy alone was not ideal. In contrast, for the Janus dressing, which possesses both antibacterial agents and great photothermal performance, the relative viability of S. aureus and E. coli dropped from 69.64 ± 6.38% and 62.83 ± 8.88% to 0.17 ± 0.24% and 0.05 ± 0.05%, respectively, exhibiting superior antibacterial performance. SEM images of bacteria further confirmed that bacteria on the Janus dressing were extensively destroyed after laser irradiation, whereas the bacterial morphology on the CG dressing remained intact (Fig. 5m). To investigate the mechanism underlying the enhanced antibacterial performance of the Janus dressing under laser irradiation, the release of silver ions was measured. The results indicated that Ag+ release from the Janus dressing was enhanced under laser irradiation; the cumulative release of silver ions after 15 min of irradiation reached 0.168 ± 0.02 μg mL−1, which was significantly higher than the 0.023 ± 0.01 μg mL−1 observed without irradiation (Fig. S13). This concentration is consistent with the effective antibacterial concentration of Ag+ reported in the literature, as Ag+ can exert potent and broad-spectrum antibacterial effects even at low concentrations [45,46]. The zeta potential of the antibacterial particles on the Janus dressing surface was also measured. The results showed that the addition of PEI increased the positive potential of AgNPs@PHT nanoparticles from 2.86 ± 0.63 mV to 12.87 ± 2.54 mV, exhibiting a strong positive charge (Fig. S14). In summary, the potential mechanism for the rapid sterilization of the Janus dressing under 808 nm NIR laser irradiation may be summarized as follows: i. Antibacterial particles (AgNPs@PHT/PEI) on the dressing rapidly capture bacteria via electrostatic adsorption; ii. The dressing absorbs 808 nm NIR light and rapidly heats up, promoting the release of a large amount of Ag+ from AgNPs@PHT/PEI; iii. Bacteria suffer attacks from both hyperthermia and Ag+, leading to structural destruction and eventual death (Fig. 5n) [[24], [25], [26],47]. Therefore, photothermal-enhanced rapid exudate evaporation and efficient sterilization established an ideal microenvironment, enabling electrical stimulation to regulate cellular behavior and expedite tissue repair.

2.4 Electrical regulation of fibroblast behavior

Adequate hemocompatibility and cytocompatibility are prerequisites for ensuring normal cellular activities [48]. The hemolysis rate of the Janus dressing was only 2.36 ± 0.09%, demonstrating its favorable hemocompatibility (Fig. 6a) [39]. Cell viability assay results on days 1, 3, and 5 indicated that the viability of human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF) on the Janus dressing under magnetic field treatment remained above 90% (Fig. 6b and Fig. S15a and b). Live/dead staining images and quantitative analysis further confirmed that cells on the Janus dressing remained largely viable, regardless of 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (Fig. S16a and b). Previous studies and related literature have reported that RMF alone has a negligible effect on the regulation of cell behavior [14,34,36]. Although ES is recognized as a key factor in regulating cell behavior, detailed investigations into the relationship between the current intensity and cell behavior regulation remain lacking [14,34,36]. Fibroblasts, as electro-responsive cells, play a crucial role in the wound healing process [49,50]. Therefore, we investigated the effects of different current outputs generated by the Janus dressing under RMF on the behavior of fibroblasts. The influence of magnetoelectric stimulation on cell proliferation was assessed by measuring the mRNA expression of the proliferation marker PCNA [4]. As illustrated in the results, the PCNA mRNA levels in the Janus dressing group at 150 and 300 rpm exhibited 1.58 ± 0.20 and 2.26 ± 0.40-fold increases relative to the 0 rpm group, respectively (Fig. 6c). In contrast, the expression level at 600 rpm displayed no significant difference from the 0 rpm group, yet it was significantly lower than that observed at 300 rpm. Relevant studies have reported that currents within the range of 10–50 μA can activate fibroblast proliferation, whereas currents exceeding this range significantly inhibit cell viability and proliferation [19,51]. Furthermore, electrons generated by magneto-electrical effects readily interact with hydroxide ions and dissolved oxygen, promoting the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which inhibit cell proliferation and even lead to cell death [52]. Thus, we measured the intracellular ROS levels under different stimulation conditions using a 2′,7′-Dichlorodihydrofluorescein Diacetate (DCFH-DA) probe (Fig. 6d). The results indicated no significant difference in ROS levels among the 0, 150, and 300 rpm groups; however, the ROS level in the 600 rpm group was 3.43 times that of the 0 rpm group (Fig. 6e). Therefore, the significantly elevated intracellular ROS level at 600 rpm may have inhibited fibroblast proliferation.Fig. 6 Regulation of cellular behavior by wireless microcurrents generated from the dressing via electromagnetic induction. (a) Hemolysis rate of the dressings (inset: photographs of hemolysis for different dressings, n = 3). (b) Cell viability assay on day 5 (n = 3). (c) PCNA mRNA expression in cells on the Janus dressing at different rotational speeds (n = 3). (d) Immunofluorescence images and (e) quantitative analysis of intracellular ROS in cells on the Janus dressing at different rotational speeds (n = 3). (f) FGF2 mRNA expression levels (n = 3), (g) FGF2 protein concentration (n = 3), and (h) TGF-β1 mRNA expression levels in cells (n = 3). (i) Immunofluorescence staining of F-actin and α-SMA in cells. (j) Quantitative analysis of α-SMA fluorescence area (n = 3). (k) Western blot images and (l) quantitative analysis of α-SMA in cells (n = 3). (m) Schematic illustration of the mechanism by which wireless microcurrents generated via electromagnetic induction inhibit myofibroblast differentiation. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

FGF2 is a crucial protein that promotes fibroblast migration, inhibits the activation of the TGF-β1 signaling pathway and myofibroblast differentiation, and reduces wound scarring [7]. Before investigating the effect of electrical stimulation on fibroblast differentiation, the influence of electrical stimulation on FGF2 synthesis in fibroblasts was characterized using Reverse Transcription-Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-qPCR) and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). RT-qPCR results indicated that FGF2 mRNA expression levels in the Janus dressing group at 150 rpm and 300 rpm were 1.99 ± 0.11 and 2.58 ± 0.45 times higher than those at 0 rpm, respectively (Fig. 6f). ELISA results showed that the FGF2 concentration in the cell culture supernatant of the Janus dressing group increased from 101.70 ± 0.86 pg mL−1 at 0 rpm to 110.80 ± 4.55 and 176.46 ± 1.70 pg mL−1 at 150 rpm and 300 rpm, respectively (Fig. 6g). The mRNA expression level of TGF-β1 was also affected by electrical stimulation. TGF-β1 expression in the Janus dressing group at 150, 300, and 600 rpm was 0.68 ± 0.02, 0.42 ± 0.05, and 0.67 ± 0.15 times that of the 0 rpm group, respectively, suggesting that FGF2 can inhibit TGF-β1 secretion by fibroblasts (Fig. 6h). α-SMA is a downstream effector of TGF-β1 and an important marker of myofibroblast differentiation [53]. The regulatory effect of electrical stimulation on fibroblast differentiation was evaluated using immunofluorescence staining and Western blotting. Immunofluorescence results indicated that α-SMA expression was weak in the control group but was significantly upregulated in fibroblasts following TGF-β1 stimulation. In contrast, both the electrical stimulation and FGF2 treatment groups exhibited inhibited α-SMA expression (Fig. 6i). Quantitative analysis of immunofluorescence showed that the α-SMA-positive area after TGF-β1 stimulation was 6.34 ± 0.26%, which decreased to 0.75 ± 0.08% and 0.39 ± 0.07% in the 300 rpm and FGF2 treatment groups, respectively (Fig. 6j). Western blotting results further confirmed the downregulation of α-SMA protein expression in fibroblasts on the Janus dressing following electrical stimulation (Fig. 6k). The α-SMA/GAPDH ratio in fibroblasts on the Janus dressing treated with 300 rpm and FGF2 decreased from 1.12 ± 0.03 in the TGF-β1-stimulated group (0 rpm) to 0.79 ± 0.06 and 0.71 ± 0.16, respectively (Fig. 6l). These results demonstrate that the wireless microcurrent generated by the Janus dressing via electromagnetic induction can promote FGF2 secretion and inhibit TGF-β1-induced differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts (Fig. 6m).

2.5 Wound healing and scar inhibition mechanism investigation

Encouraged by the in vitro results, a full-thickness skin defect model infected with S. aureus was established to further verify the efficacy of the Janus dressing in promoting wound healing and inhibiting scarring under 808 nm NIR irradiation and a rotating magnetic field (Fig. 7a). Infrared thermal images showed no significant temperature change in the Control group (commercial gauze) under laser irradiation, whereas the Janus dressing heated up to 45.2 °C within 3 min, maintaining heat coverage over the wound (Fig. 7b). Simultaneously, the Janus dressing on the wound bed stably generated a current of approximately 26 μA across its two ends under RMF, acting as a continuous ES for wound treatment (Fig. 7c). Representative images of wound healing at different time points showed that in the Control group, yellow exudate secretion persisted until day 28. In contrast, the Janus and Janus ES groups ceased secretion and formed scabs by day 7 (Fig. 7d). Notably, the Janus ES + NIR group achieved a dry wound bed and scab formation as early as day 3 by rapidly draining exudate and promoting its evaporation. Wound outline schematics also illustrated a reduction in wound area across all groups; by day 21, the wounds in the Janus ES + NIR group were nearly completely closed, while the other groups still exhibited large unhealed areas. Furthermore, the structural design of the Janus dressing strategically places the silver-containing layer within the hydrophilic layer, away from the wound bed. This configuration effectively prevents prolonged direct contact between Ag+ and the wound tissue, thereby mitigating the potential risk of blue-gray or blue-black skin pigmentation induced by long-term silver exposure [24,54]. The wound healing heat map indicated slow healing in the Control group and the most rapid healing in the Janus ES + NIR group (Fig. 7e). On day 35, the healing rate of the Control group was only 74.82 ± 9.03%, while the Janus and Janus ES groups reached 85.72 ± 1.00% and 88.87 ± 0.92%, respectively; the Janus ES + NIR group achieved a healing rate of 99.36 ± 1.10% (Fig. 7f). The bacterial infection status was evaluated by sampling the wound bed during the early healing stage and culturing on agar plates. Representative images of bacterial colonies revealed that the Control group harbored a large number of viable colonies, indicating persistent severe bacterial infection (Fig. 7g). The Janus and Janus ES groups effectively reduced bacterial colonies by draining bacteria-laden exudate out of the wound and blocking external bacteria; however, they failed to eradicate bacteria residing deep within the wound. In contrast, the Janus ES + NIR group showed only a few bacterial colonies on day 7, with bacterial viability as low as 0.22 ± 0.12% (Fig. 7h). This demonstrates that the synergistic effects of exudate drainage, antibacterial agents, and photothermal action effectively inhibited bacterial infection and promoted rapid wound healing. The zebrafish embryo development tests indicated that embryos in all treatment groups developed normally into fish, confirming the good in vivo safety profile of the Janus ES + NIR treatment (Fig. 7i).Fig. 7 Evaluation of wound healing efficacy. (a) Schematic illustration of the establishment of an animal model with infected large skin defects and the dressing treatment process. (b) Infrared thermal images of the dressing on the wound under 808 nm NIR irradiation at a power density of 0.2 W cm−2. (c) The Janus dressing on the wound bed stably output wireless current at both ends under RMF. (d) Representative images of wound healing and heatmaps of wound areas at different time points. (e) Heatmaps of wound healing. (f) Comparison of wound healing rates on day 35 (n = 3). (g) Representative photographs of bacterial colonies on agar plates after different treatments. (h) Quantitative analysis of relative bacterial viability in different treatment groups on days 3 and 7 (n = 3). (i) Representative morphological images of zebrafish embryo development following different treatments. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

Histological analysis of wound skin tissues collected at different time points was performed to elucidate the mechanism of rapid wound healing. The initiation of the inflammatory response during the early stage of wound healing facilitates the clearance of wound debris by immune cells, prevents infection, and paves the way for subsequent cell proliferation and healing [30]. Immunohistochemical staining and quantitative analysis of Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) in wound tissues on day 3 indicated high TNF-α expression across all treatment groups. The TNF-α positive areas in the Control and Janus ES + NIR groups were 12.32 ± 0.26% and 11.16 ± 0.28%, respectively, suggesting that all groups were in a stage of severe inflammatory response (Fig. 8a and b). By day 7, disparities in TNF-α expression emerged among the groups. The Control and Janus groups maintained high TNF-α expression, with positive areas of 15.09 ± 1.34% and 13.06 ± 0.80%, respectively, whereas TNF-α levels in the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups decreased to 9.23 ± 0.61% and 7.36 ± 0.71%, respectively (Fig. 8c and d). H&E staining of wound tissues on days 3 and 7 also revealed a reduction in inflammatory cells and wound area in the Janus ES + NIR group (Fig. S17). Differences were also observed in the expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine Interleukin-10 (IL-10). The IL-10 positive area in the Janus ES + NIR group reached 12.35 ± 1.92%, significantly higher than the 5.87 ± 0.57% observed in the Control group (Fig. 8e and f). Macrophages are key players in immune regulation [50]. M1 macrophages release pro-inflammatory cytokines and exert phagocytic activity to clear bacteria and necrotic tissue debris, thereby reducing wound infection [4]. In contrast, M2 macrophages secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines and clear apoptotic cells, suppressing the persistence of the inflammatory response [50]. CD86 molecule (CD86) and CD206 molecule (CD206) are markers for M1 and M2 macrophages, respectively [21,50,53]. Immunofluorescence results for CD86 and CD206 in wound tissues showed that the Control group exhibited significantly higher CD86 expression than CD206. In the other groups, CD86 expression gradually decreased, while CD206 showed an opposite trend; notably, the Janus ES + NIR group exhibited significantly higher CD206 expression than CD86 (Fig. 8g). The CD86 positive area in the Janus ES + NIR group was 1.15 ± 0.18%, significantly lower than the 5.09 ± 1.27% in the Control group, while the CD206 positive area was 2.25 ± 0.54%, significantly higher than the 0.44 ± 0.10% in the Control group (Fig. 8h and i). Thus, the Janus ES + NIR group effectively promoted the activation and resolution of inflammation by modulating macrophage phenotype switching. Ki67 is a major marker of cell proliferation [55]. Immunohistochemical staining indicated that electrical stimulation and laser irradiation effectively promoted cell proliferation, with Ki67 expression significantly higher than that in the Control group (Fig. 8j). The Ki67 positive areas in the Janus and Janus ES groups were 21.70 ± 2.25% and 28.22 ± 2.04%, respectively, while the Janus ES + NIR group reached 34.01 ± 1.81%, significantly higher than the 17.32 ± 1.35% in the Control group (Fig. 8k). Early rapid vascularization facilitates the exchange of nutrients and oxygen [48,55]. Immunohistochemical staining for platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (CD31) showed that electrical stimulation and laser irradiation promoted angiogenesis in wound tissues, increasing CD31 expression (Fig. 8l). The CD31 positive area in the Janus ES + NIR group was 6.48 ± 0.44%, significantly higher than the 2.22 ± 0.43% in the Control group (Fig. 8m). The radar chart illustrated the distinct advantages of the Janus ES + NIR dressing, which integrates exudate drainage, evaporation, electrical stimulation, and photothermal therapy, in immune regulation, cell proliferation, and vascularization (Fig. 8n).Fig. 8 Evaluation of inflammation and angiogenesis effects during the early stage of wound healing. (a) Representative images and (b) quantitative analysis of TNF-α immunohistochemical staining of wounds on day 3 (n = 3). (c) Representative images and (d) quantitative analysis of TNF-α immunohistochemical staining of wounds on day 7 (n = 3). (e) Representative images and (f) quantitative analysis of IL-10 immunohistochemical staining in wound tissues (n = 3). (g) Representative images of CD86 and CD206 immunofluorescence staining in wound tissues and (h, i) quantitative analysis (n = 3). (j) Representative images and (k) quantitative analysis of Ki67 immunohistochemical staining in wound tissues (n = 3). (l) Representative images and (m) quantitative analysis of CD31 immunohistochemical staining in wound tissues (n = 3). (n) Radar chart of multiple proteins related to inflammation regulation and angiogenesis during wound healing. (o) Volcano plot. (p) Schematic illustration of the mechanism by which the Janus dressing synergizes with NIR and ES to promote the transition of wound healing from the inflammatory phase to the proliferative phase. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

RNA sequencing was utilized to further investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the positive therapeutic effects of Janus ES + NIR. Principal component analysis results indicated a clear separation between the Janus ES + NIR and Control groups, revealing significant differences in their gene expression profiles (Fig. S18a). Among the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 598 were downregulated, and 285 were upregulated (Fig. 8o). The heatmap showed that genes related to inflammatory responses (e.g., Fos, Xcr1, Tnfsf8) were significantly downregulated, while genes promoting vascularization (e.g., Rps6kb1, Nog, Hrasl1) were significantly upregulated in the Janus ES + NIR group (Fig. S18b) [56,57]. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of DEGs indicated a reduction in inflammatory responses in the Janus ES + NIR group across the Biological Process (BP), Cellular Component (CC), and Molecular Function (MF) categories (Fig. S19). Consistent with previous literature, the ES and photothermal therapy downregulated genes associated with the expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) (e.g., Il27ra and Lep), thereby promoting macrophage polarization from the M1 to the M2 phenotype, which is crucial for tissue repair [44,58]. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis further corroborated these findings. Specifically, ES downregulated pro-inflammatory signaling pathways, including JAK-STAT, NF-kappa B, and TNF [14,59]. Concurrently, NIR-mediated photothermal therapy, by enhancing blood supply and alleviating the hypoxic microenvironment, led to the downregulation of HIF-1 and p53 signaling pathways [44]. These effects ultimately resulted in the effective resolution of inflammation in the Janus ES + NIR group (Fig. S20a). Furthermore, transcriptomic analysis indicated that ES activated VEGF and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways, thereby promoting cell proliferation and vascularization (Fig. S20b) [60,61]. These results demonstrate that the Janus dressing, based on exudate drainage, electrical stimulation, and photothermal therapy, effectively controlled inflammation and bacterial infection during the early stage of wound healing, and promoted cell proliferation and vascularization, facilitating the transition into the proliferative phase of wound healing (Fig. 8p).

Activated fibroblasts secrete large amounts of collagen during the wound proliferation phase to rapidly fill tissue defects, providing support for cellular activities [49]. Masson staining results indicated that on day 28, the Control group exhibited a large wound bed area with low collagen synthesis and a scattered, disordered distribution. In contrast, the Janus ES + NIR group displayed collagen in an irregular reticular structure with a content significantly higher than that of the Control group (Fig. 9a). The Control group showed poor epithelialization with a thicker epidermis (0.19 ± 0.02 mm), whereas the Janus ES + NIR group achieved complete epithelialization with an epidermal thickness (0.11 ± 0.01 mm) closer to that of normal skin (Fig. 9b) [56]. The collagen volume fractions of the Janus and Janus ES groups were 30.87 ± 0.37% and 32.79 ± 1.08%, respectively. The Janus ES + NIR group exhibited a collagen volume fraction of 42.95 ± 5.60%, which was significantly superior to that of the Control group (25.44 ± 2.55%), demonstrating that the Janus dressing effectively promoted collagen deposition and epithelialization during the proliferation phase based on ES and NIR (Fig. 9c).Fig. 9 Evaluation of wound healing quality and neuroregeneration effects. (a) Representative images of Masson staining of wounds on day 28, and quantitative analysis of (b) epidermal thickness and (c) collagen deposition (n = 3). (d) Representative images of Protein Gene Product 9.5 (PGP9.5) immunofluorescence staining of wounds on day 28 and (e) quantitative analysis (n = 3). (f) Volcano plot and (g) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of genes related to skin development based on DEGs between the Control and Janus ES + NIR groups on day 28. (h) heatmap of related genes associated with nerve regeneration based on DEGs between the Control and Janus ES + NIR groups on day 28. (i) KEGG pathway enrichment. (j) GO enrichment. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

Nerve regeneration at the wound site, in addition to restoring sensory function, actively participates in regulating the wound healing microenvironment and improving the quality of wound recovery [14,52]. PGP9.5 is an important marker of nerve fibers [62]. Immunofluorescence results showed low PGP9.5 expression in the Control group. ES and NIR promoted PGP9.5 expression, and in the Janus ES + NIR group, PGP9.5 was accompanied by the vascular network, restoring sensory function and nutritional support (Fig. 9d). Quantitative results also indicated that the PGP9.5-positive areas in the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups were 1.37 ± 0.12% and 3.07 ± 0.57%, respectively, significantly higher than the 0.44 ± 0.01% in the Control group (Fig. 9e). RNA sequencing analysis revealed that among the differentially expressed genes between the Janus ES + NIR and Control groups, 822 were downregulated and 598 were upregulated (Fig. 9f). GSEA enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes showed that the Janus ES + NIR group significantly upregulated genes related to skin development, promoting rapid wound healing (Fig. 9g). Janus ES + NIR upregulated genes related to nerve regeneration, such as Hspa8, Gsk3b, and Rps6ka3 (Fig. 9h) [14,62,63]. KEGG enrichment analysis similarly indicated that the Janus ES + NIR group upregulated signaling pathways related to nerve regeneration, including MAPK, mTOR, PI3K-Akt, and Axon guidance (Fig. 9i). GO enrichment analysis showed that the Janus ES + NIR group upregulated cellular activities related to nerve regeneration at the BP, CC, and MF levels (Fig. 9j) [14,63,64].

During the remodeling phase of wound healing, excessive collagen deposition combined with insufficient degradation and disordered arrangement leads to the formation of hypertrophic scars [26]. Masson staining results on day 35 showed that collagen in the Control group was loose and scattered, whereas the other groups exhibited more collagen with a uniform distribution (Fig. 10a). Furthermore, the collagen in all treatment groups maintained its normal blue color, without the appearance of red staining indicative of thermal denaturation [65,66]. This indicates that repeated irradiation at 45 °C did not induce significant thermal damage. There was scarce hair follicle neogenesis around the wound bed in the Control group, while the Janus ES + NIR group exhibited significant hair follicle regeneration. The collagen volume fraction in the Janus ES + NIR group was 60.65 ± 1.83%, which was closer to the collagen content of normal skin (Fig. 10b). Sirius red staining and collagen fiber orientation test results indicated that collagen in the Control group was mainly composed of Col Ⅰ and arranged in an oriented manner, representing a typical collagen structure of scar tissue (Fig. 10c and d). The collagen in the Janus group presented an interwoven reticular structure, but Col III still predominated. In the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups, Col III content decreased significantly, while Col I content increased, with fibers rearranging and cross-linking to form a mesh structure. The Col I/Col III ratios for the Janus ES + NIR and Control groups were 4.41 ± 0.62 and 1.74 ± 0.09, respectively, while those for the Janus and Janus ES groups were 2.17 ± 0.60 and 3.16 ± 0.13, respectively, demonstrating that the Janus dressing based on ES and NIR promoted collagen remodeling (Fig. 10e).Fig. 10 Evaluation of scar inhibition effects. (a) Representative images of Masson's trichrome staining (the black * indicates the hair follicles) and (b) quantitative analysis of collagen deposition in wounds on day 35 (n = 3). (c) Sirius Red staining and (d) collagen orientation of wounds. (e) Quantitative analysis of collagen orientation and ratio of type I collagen to type III collagen (n = 3). (f) Representative images of FGF2 immunohistochemical staining and (g) quantitative analysis in wounds (n = 3). (h) Representative images of TGF-β1 immunohistochemical staining and (i) quantitative analysis in wounds (n = 3). (j) Representative images of SMAD family member 2 (Smad2) immunohistochemical staining and (k) quantitative analysis in wounds (n = 3). (l) Representative images of α-SMA immunohistochemical staining and (m) quantitative analysis in wounds (n = 3). (n) Representative images of MMP1 immunohistochemical staining and (o) quantitative analysis in wounds (n = 3). (p) Radar chart of indicators related to nerve regeneration and scar inhibition during wound healing. (q) Schematic illustration of the mechanism by which the Janus dressing promotes nerve regeneration and inhibits scar formation via wireless ES. Data presented as mean ± standard deviation (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s. denotes non-significant differences (p ≥ 0.05).

FGF2 can antagonize the TGF-β signaling pathway to inhibit myofibroblast activation and upregulate MMP1 expression to promote collagen degradation, showing significant effects in anti-fibrosis and inhibiting wound scar formation [7]. Immunohistochemical staining for FGF2 showed low expression in the Control and Janus groups (positive relative areas of 3.73 ± 0.14% and 4.78 ± 0.90%, respectively). In contrast, FGF2 expression was significantly upregulated in the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups (positive relative areas of 7.27 ± 0.91% and 8.76 ± 0.62%, respectively), proving that ES effectively promoted cellular FGF2 secretion (Fig. 10f and g). Immunohistochemical staining for TGF-β1 indicated high expression in the Control group (9.58 ± 2.81%). The Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups showed significant downregulation (positive relative areas of 2.32 ± 0.27% and 1.52 ± 0.22%, respectively), demonstrating that FGF2 effectively inhibited further TGF-β1 secretion by cells (Fig. 10h and i). Smad2 is a key intracellular signaling protein activated after TGF-β1 ligand binding, and phosphorylated Smad2 is mainly responsible for regulating collagen synthesis and α-SMA expression [7,[67], [68], [69]]. Immunohistochemical staining for Smad2 revealed high expression in the Control and Janus groups (positive relative areas of 32.64 ± 0.98% and 24.37 ± 3.48%, respectively) (Fig. 10j and k). The positive areas for Smad2 in the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups were 11.68 ± 1.35% and 5.3 ± 1.95%, respectively, indicating significantly downregulated Smad2 protein expression. α-SMA is a major marker of myofibroblasts [53]. Immunohistochemical staining results showed high α-SMA expression in the Control group (positive relative area of 7.19 ± 0.83%), whereas the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups exhibited significant downregulation (positive relative areas of 1.97 ± 0.02% and 1.19 ± 0.34%, respectively), demonstrating effective inhibition of myofibroblast activation (Fig. 10l and m). Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) is a key enzyme for collagen degradation [70]. Immunohistochemical staining showed low expression in the Control and Janus groups (positive relative areas of 1.74 ± 0.09% and 1.64 ± 0.13%, respectively) (Fig. 10n and o). Expression was upregulated in the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups to 2.46 ± 0.01% and 3.05 ± 0.10%, respectively, facilitating collagen degradation and remodeling during the remodeling phase. The radar chart illustrated the distinct advantages of the Janus ES + NIR group in promoting wound nerve regeneration and inhibiting scarring (Fig. 10p). In summary, the Janus dressing, featuring exudate management, wireless electrical stimulation, and photothermal therapy, effectively promoted collagen deposition and nerve regeneration during the proliferation phase. Furthermore, a comparison of the scar inhibition efficacy between the Janus ES and Janus ES + NIR groups, combined with the in vitro findings that ES inhibits fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation, indicates that the wireless microcurrent output by the Janus dressing under RMF is the critical path for effectively promoting FGF2 secretion, inhibiting myofibroblast activation, suppressing scar formation, and enhancing the quality of wound repair (Fig. 10q).

In this study, based on the dynamic requirements of the wound healing process, we proposed a therapeutic strategy integrating exudate extraction, rapid sterilization, and wireless ES. Both in vitro and in vivo results demonstrated that this strategy exhibited significant therapeutic efficacy in controlling wound infections, regulating the immune microenvironment, promoting rapid wound healing, and facilitating nerve and hair follicle regeneration, as well as inhibiting scar formation. To the best of our knowledge, this combined strategy has not been previously reported, indicating that it holds profound significance for the fields of rapid wound repair and scar inhibition (Table S1). Although these findings are encouraging, certain limitations remain in the current study that require further improvement. First, while our in vitro experiments demonstrated that ES promotes FGF2 secretion and inhibits TGF-β1/α-SMA expression, whether ES directly regulates this pathway remains unclear, and in-depth validation of the TGF-β1/Smad2 pathway is currently lacking. Therefore, quantitative analysis of p-Smad2/p-Smad3 and FGF2 blockade experiments will be necessary for further investigation in future studies. Second, future studies should utilize larger animal cohorts to enhance statistical power and extend the observation period to comprehensively evaluate the long-term evolution of scars. Furthermore, in-depth mechanistic investigations using techniques such as WB and RT-qPCR are needed to elucidate how the Janus ES + NIR strategy regulates signaling pathways related to immune modulation and nerve regeneration. In addition, the transport performance under highly viscous wound pus or simulated fluids requires further verification in future studies. Finally, given the physiological differences in skin wound healing between rodents and humans, validating the efficacy of this strategy in models that more closely mimic human healing, such as rabbit ear or porcine skin defect models, will significantly strengthen the translational relevance of these findings.

3 Conclusion

In conclusion, we developed an electroactive antibacterial Janus dressing that integrates active exudate management and antibacterial activity with wireless ES for scar inhibition during wound healing. In vitro evaluations demonstrated that 808 nm NIR irradiation significantly enhanced the dressing's unidirectional exudate drainage and evaporation, and gravity-resistant bacterial capture for rapid sterilization of the Janus dressing. Furthermore, the wirelessly driven microcurrents, induced by a rotating magnetic field, effectively regulated fibroblast behavior by promoting proliferation and FGF2 secretion, while effectively inhibiting TGF-β1-induced myofibroblast differentiation. In vivo findings revealed that Janus ES + NIR treatment rapidly cleared exudates and bacteria during the inflammatory phase of wound healing. By reshaping the wound microenvironment, this strategy enhanced the precision and efficacy of ES therapy, ultimately facilitating cell proliferation, immunomodulation, and angiogenesis. During the proliferative phase, it facilitated collagen deposition and nerve regeneration. Notably, in the remodeling phase, the treatment promoted collagen remodeling and inhibited scar formation by upregulating FGF2 and MMP1 secretion while downregulating TGF-β1, Smad2, and α-SMA expression, achieving a healing rate of 99.37 ± 1.10%. Collectively, this strategy holds great promise for promoting rapid wound closure and scar inhibition of large-defect chronic wounds, as well as for mitigating fibrotic disorders.

4 Experimental section

Materials: CG were provided by Winner Medical Co., Ltd. Dopamine hydrochloride (DA, >98%), tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris base, ≥99.8%), pyrrole (Py, ≥99%), cyclohexane (≥99%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), iron chloride hexahydrate (FeCl3·6H2O, ≥98%), silver nitrate (AgNO3, ≥99.8%), and polyethyleneimine (PEI, M.N. 70,000, 50% aqueous solution) were all obtained from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. 5-Hydroxytryptamine hydrochloride (5-HT, 98%) was obtained from Shanghai Titan Scientific Technology Co., Ltd. Sodium sulfosalicylate (NaSSA, 99%) was provided by Shanghai Yien Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. Hydrophobic SiO2 nanoparticle dispersion (S500) was supplied by Shanghai Huaxia Jiahe New Material Technology Co., Ltd. Hot melt adhesive was provided by Shenzhen Mileqi Tape Co., Ltd.

Preparation of the Janus Dressing: To prepare the CPDA dressing, 0.3 g of Tris base was dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water, and the pH was adjusted to 8.5 using HCl. Subsequently, 0.1 g of DA was added and allowed to dissolve completely. The CG was then immersed in the solution and placed in a shaking incubator at 37 °C for 24 h in the dark. Afterward, the sample was removed, washed repeatedly with deionized water, and dried. Next, 0.486 g of FeCl3·6H2O and 0.47 g of NaSSA were dissolved in 30 mL of deionized water, into which the CPDA dressing was immersed, and the mixture was frozen in a refrigerator at −20 °C. Subsequently, 1 mL of Py was dispersed in 20 mL of cyclohexane and poured onto the surface of the ice. The polymerization was carried out in the dark at 4 °C for 24 h. The resulting sample was washed repeatedly with deionized water and anhydrous ethanol and dried to obtain the CPP dressing. The CPP dressing was immersed in the hydrophobic agent S500 for 10 s, then removed and dried to obtain the CPPS dressing. 0.042 g of 5-HT and PEI, along with 0.017 g of AgNO3 were dissolved in 100 mL of sodium carbonate/sodium bicarbonate buffer solution (pH = 8.5). The CPP dressing was immersed in this solution and reacted in a shaking incubator at 30 °C for 30 min in the dark, followed by repeated washing with deionized water and drying to obtain the CPPAP dressing. The reaction solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min, and the precipitate was collected and freeze-dried to obtain AgNPs@PHT/PEI nanoparticles. Finally, CPPS and CPPAP were tailored into squares of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm. Hot-melt adhesive (3 mm in width and 0.15 mm in thickness) was placed along the edges between the two layers. Subsequently, an electric iron (130 °C) was used to firmly press the assembly for 10 s. After cooling, the Janus dressing was obtained.

Characterizations: The microscopic morphology of the dressings was characterized by SEM (Hitachi, Japan) and TEM (Talos F200S, USA). The phase structure and composition were analyzed by XRD (Bruker D8 ADVANCE, USA) and XPS (Escalab 250Xi, USA). The Si and Ag contents in the dressings were measured using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (iCAP Q, USA). The Zeta potential of AgNPs@PHT/PEI nanoparticles was measured using a Zeta potential analyzer (Nano ZS, UK). The surface wettability of the dressings was evaluated using a contact angle goniometer (OCA15EC, Germany). The mechanical properties, air permeability, and electrical conductivity of the dressings were characterized using an electronic universal testing machine (CTM2050, China), a fabric air permeability tester (YG461G, China), and a source meter (Keithley 2450, USA), respectively. A NdFeB permanent magnet was fixed onto an overhead stirrer (OS20-S, China). The frequency of the RMF was controlled by adjusting the rotational speed of the stirrer, while the magnetic field strength on the dressing surface was regulated by varying the distance between the dressing and the magnet. The magnetic field strength was measured using a Gauss meter (TD8620, China). To record the electrical signals generated by the dressing (2.5 cm × 2.5 cm, bilayer) under the RMF, alligator-clip leads were clamped in parallel onto both ends of the dressing and connected to a digital source meter. The source meter was exclusively utilized to record the electrical output of the dressing and was interfaced with a computer for data acquisition. The test environment parameters were a temperature of 20 ± 2 °C and a humidity of 65 ± 2%. Furthermore, the electrical signal output of the dressing under the magnetic field was simulated using ANSYS Electronic Desktop. The surface temperature changes of the dressings were monitored using an infrared thermal imager (Flir ONE Edge PRO, USA).

Unidirectional Liquid Transport Test: Rhb solution (2.5 μg mL−1) was dropped onto the dressing to observe the mobility of the droplets on different sides. A UV lamp (365 nm) was used to illuminate the RhB solution, which appeared orange for better visualization. To investigate the anti-gravity liquid transport capability, the Janus dressing was horizontally fixed using a fixture, and the RhB solution (100 μL) was dropped onto the bottom surface. The capability was assessed by varying the wettability of the bottom layer material. Conversely, the gravity-driven liquid transport capability was verified by dropping the RhB solution onto the top surface of the dressing. To assess the anti-gravity transport capability, the dressing (1 cm diameter) was placed onto an agar plate seeded with an E. coli suspension (100 μL, 108 CFU mL−1) and incubated for 18 h. In contrast, to evaluate the barrier performance against downward penetration, the dressing was first positioned on the agar plate, and the bacterial suspension was subsequently applied onto the dressing before 18 h of incubation. After fixation with glutaraldehyde, dehydration in a graded ethanol series, and sputter-coating with gold, the residual bacteria on both sides of the dressings were observed by SEM.

Photothermal Evaporation Performance Test: To mimic the photothermal properties of the dressing upon exudate absorption, the samples were soaked in deionized water to achieve a wet state and then irradiated with an 808 nm laser, while an infrared thermal imager was employed to record real-time temperature variations. For the water evaporation measurement, a beaker containing 30 mL of deionized water was placed on an electronic balance. The dressing was placed on a foam board floating on the water surface, with a cotton wick connecting the dressing to the bulk water for a water supply. The system was irradiated with an 808 nm laser for 1 h, during which the mass change was recorded in real-time based on the balance readings.

Antibacterial Experiments: The UV-sterilized dressings were cut into circular discs with a diameter of 1 cm. Subsequently, 100 μL of S. aureus or E. coli bacterial suspension (106 CFU mL−1) was dropped onto the surface of the dressing and allowed to stand in an incubator for 30 min, followed by irradiation with an 808 nm laser for 15 min. After the treatment, the dressing was transferred into 2 mL of phosphate-buffered saline and sonicated for 1 min to obtain the bacterial suspension. A 50 μL aliquot of the suspension, diluted 100-fold, was uniformly spread onto an agar plate. After incubation at 37 °C for 18 h, the bacterial colonies were counted using ImageJ software to calculate the relative bacterial viability. For morphological observation, the bacterial suspension was dropped onto a glass slide and dried at 37 °C. The samples were then fixed with glutaraldehyde, dehydrated using a gradient ethanol series, and finally observed by SEM.

Cell Experiments: HFF were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well. Sterilized dressings (1 cm in diameter) were placed into the wells and co-cultured for 1, 3, and 5 days. Cell viability was evaluated using a Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8, Beyotime, Shanghai, China). To assess the photothermal effect on the cell viability, HFF seeded on the dressings at 2 × 104 cells/well were irradiated with the 808 nm laser (0.2 W cm−2) for 15 min daily for 5 consecutive days. The effect of photothermal treatment on cell viability was evaluated using the Calcein/PI Cell Viability Assay Kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). To investigate the effect of magnetic field rotation speed on cell proliferation, HFF were seeded onto the dressings at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well. The cells were treated daily with a magnetic field (90 mT) for 15 min at rotation speeds of 0, 150, 300, and 600 rpm. On day 3, total RNA was extracted, reverse transcribed into cDNA, and the expression of PCNA was analyzed by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR, Wuhan Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China). For intracellular ROS detection, HFF were seeded onto the dressings at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well and cultured for 3 days. ROS levels were measured using a ROS Assay Kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). Similarly, the mRNA expression levels of FGF2 and TGF-β1 in HFF were analyzed by RT-qPCR. The concentration of FGF2 in the cell culture supernatant was determined using a Human Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor ELISA Kit (Wuhan Procell Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China). For differentiation and morphological studies, HFF were seeded onto the dressings at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well. After 4 h of adhesion, the medium was replaced with medium containing TGF-β1 (10 ng mL−1) and cultured for 5 days. The group without TGF-β1 served as the control, and the group treated with both TGF-β1 and FGF2 (10 ng mL−1) served as the FGF2 treatment group. On day 5, the nuclei, cytoskeleton, and α-SMA were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Beyotime, Shanghai, China), CoraLite®Plus 488-phalloidin (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA), and CoraLite®594-conjugated Alpha Smooth Muscle Actin Polyclonal Antibody (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA), respectively. Western blot analysis of α-SMA protein expression was performed by Yishengyuan Detection Technology Service (Tianjin, China). Additionally, HFF were seeded onto the dressings at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well and cultured for 1, 3, and 5 days. Unless otherwise stated, the parameters for magnetic field treatment were 90 mT, 15 min, and 300 rpm. The primer sequences of PCNA, FGF2, and TGF-β1 are provided in Table S2.

Ethical Statement: All animal experiments conducted in this study were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Donghua University (Approval No. DWSY202410240145) and were performed in accordance with international animal welfare standards.

Animal Experiments: Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were provided by Sipeifu Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China). After anesthesia was induced via intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg), full-thickness skin defects (2 cm in diameter) were created on the dorsal region of the rats. Subsequently, 100 μL of a S. aureus suspension (107 CFU mL−1) was inoculated onto the wound surface and allowed to stand for 30 min. To alleviate postoperative pain, buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg) was administered subcutaneously immediately after modeling. The rats were then randomly assigned to groups (12 per group) using a computer-generated random number table and treated with different dressings. Photographs were taken, and tissue samples were collected for histological analysis at predetermined time points. On day 3, 100 μL of S. aureus suspension (107 CFU mL−1) was applied to the surface of the wound bed dressing to simulate external bacterial invasion. Zebrafish embryos were provided by Shandong YiXiYue Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The embryos were randomly grouped and co-cultured with different dressings. Photographs were taken at designated time points to analyze the effect of the dressings on embryonic development. The parameters for the 808 nm laser irradiation were 0.2 W cm−2 for 15 min/day. The parameters for the magnetic field treatment were 90 mT and 300 rpm for 15 min/day. After the dressing was secured on the wound bed, alligator clips with leads were clamped onto both ends of the dressing and connected to a source meter. The source meter was set to Voltage Bias mode with a voltage level of 0 V. The distance between the clips was 2.5 cm, and the resistance across the dressing ends was approximately 37.58 ± 0.57 Ω. This setup was used to measure the current output performance of the dressing on the wound bed under RMF.

Histological Analysis: At the designated sampling time points, animals were deeply anesthetized for tissue sample collection, followed by euthanasia. To ensure blinded evaluation, the tissue samples were submitted to Wuhan Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd. (unaware of the grouping situation) for immunohistochemical staining (TNF-α, IL-10, Ki67, CD31, FGF2, TGF-β1, Smad2, MMP1, and α-SMA), immunofluorescence staining (CD86, CD206, and PGP9.5), histological staining (H&E, Masson's trichrome, and Sirius red staining), as well as RNA transcriptome sequencing and analysis.

Statistical Analysis: All quantitative data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) from at least three independent experiments. Image analysis was performed using Fiji and ImageJ software. Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism 10 and Origin 2021 software. Comparisons among multiple groups were evaluated by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey's honestly significant difference post hoc test for all pairwise multiple comparisons. All tests were two-sided. Statistical significance was defined as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001; n.s. indicates not significant (p ≥ 0.05).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Fengkai Zhou: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – original draft. Wenshuo Zhao: Validation, Visualization. Ziyue Zhu: Validation. Shasha Wang: Visualization. Liqin Tang: Visualization. Mengqi Shan: Visualization. Qian Zhang: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Fujun Wang: Resources. Guixue Wang: Supervision. Lu Wang: Supervision. Jifu Mao: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

All animal experiments conducted in this study were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Donghua University (Approval No. DWSY202410240145) and were performed in accordance with international animal welfare standards.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A Supplementary data

The following are the Supplementary data to this article:Multimedia component 1

Multimedia component 2

Multimedia component 3

Multimedia component 4

Multimedia component 5

Multimedia component 6

Multimedia component 7

Multimedia component 8

Multimedia component 9

Multimedia component 10

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the following sources of financial support: the 10.13039/501100012166 National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2025YFF0523700); the 10.13039/501100001809 National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52203032); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2232026A3, CUSF-DH-T-2023016); the 10.13039/501100013314 111 Project (Grant No. BP0719035); and the 10.13039/501100006249 DHU Distinguished Young Professor Program.

Peer review under the responsibility of editorial board of Bioactive Materials.

Appendix A Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2026.08.012.


References

1 Mascharak S. desJardins-Park H.E. Davitt M.F. Griffin M. Borrelli M.R. Moore A.L. Chen K. Duoto B. Chinta M. Foster D.S. Shen A.H. Januszyk M. Kwon S.H. Wernig G. Wan D.C. Lorenz H.P. Gurtner G.C. Longaker M.T. Preventing Engrailed-1 activation in fibroblasts yields wound regeneration without scarring Science 372 6540 2021 10.1126/science.aba2374 eaba2374 PMC9008875 33888614
2 Lagares D. Ghassemi-Kakroodi P. Tremblay C. Santos A. Probst C.K. Franklin A. Santos D.M. Grasberger P. Ahluwalia N. Montesi S.B. Shea B.S. Black K.E. Knipe R. Blati M. Baron M. Wu B. Fahmi H. Gandhi R. Pardo A. Selman M. Wu J. Pelletier J.-P. Martel-Pelletier J. Tager A.M. Kapoor M. ADAM10-Mediated Ephrin-B2 shedding promotes myofibroblast activation and organ fibrosis Nat. Med. 23 12 2017 1405 1415 10.1038/nm.4419 29058717 PMC5720906
3 Qi H. Shi J. Wei X. Jiang X. Yang Y. Wei J. Chen R. Li H. Lai H. Liu B. Reactive oxygen species scavenging and thermosensitive smart release-stiffening integrated hydrogel for diabetic wound therapy ACS Nano 20 7 2026 6034 6051 10.1021/acsnano.5c19613 41651006
4 He C. Yuan K. Sun Y. Chen Y. Zhong X. Yu M. Lin J. Peng X. Bioadhesive hydrogel with CO2-Induced water repulsion and tissue anchoring for drug delivery and wound management Adv. Funct. Mater. 36 12 2026 e13408 10.1002/adfm.202513408
5 Shah M. Foreman D.M. Ferguson M.W.J. Control of scarring in adult wounds by neutralising antibody to transforming growth factor β Lancet 339 8787 1992 213 214 10.1016/0140-6736(92)90009-R 1346175
6 Henderson N.C. Rieder F. Wynn T.A. Fibrosis: from mechanisms to medicines Nature 587 7835 2020 555 566 10.1038/s41586-020-2938-9 33239795 PMC8034822
7 Dolivo D.M. Larson S.A. Dominko T. Fibroblast growth factor 2 as an antifibrotic: antagonism of myofibroblast differentiation and suppression of pro-fibrotic gene expression Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 38 2017 49 58 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2017.09.003 28967471 PMC5705586
8 Montero R.B. Vial X. Nguyen D.T. Farhand S. Reardon M. Pham S.M. Tsechpenakis G. Andreopoulos F.M. bFGF-Containing electrospun gelatin Scaffolds with controlled nano-architectural features for directed angiogenesis Acta Biomater. 8 5 2012 1778 1791 10.1016/j.actbio.2011.12.008 22200610 PMC3432918
9 Ding X. Gao J. Wang Z. Awada H. Wang Y. A shear-thinning hydrogel that extends in vivo bioactivity of FGF2 Biomaterials 111 2016 80 89 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.09.026 27728816
10 Jonidi Shariatzadeh F. Currie S. Logsetty S. Spiwak R. Liu S. Enhancing wound healing and minimizing scarring: a comprehensive review of Nanofiber technology in wound dressings Prog. Mater. Sci. 147 2025 101350 10.1016/j.pmatsci.2024.101350
11 Syromiatnikova V.Y. Kvon A.I. Starostina I.G. Gomzikova M.O. Strategies to enhance the efficacy of FGF2-Based therapies for skin wound healing Arch. Dermatol. Res. 316 7 2024 405 10.1007/s00403-024-02953-x 38878084
12 Nie J. Zhou L. Tian W. Liu X. Yang L. Yang X. Zhang Y. Wei S. Wang D.W. Wei J. Deep Insight into cytokine storm: from pathogenesis to treatment Signal Transduct. Targeted Ther. 10 1 2025 112 10.1038/s41392-025-02178-y PMC12000524 40234407
13 Peña O.A. Martin P. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of skin wound healing Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 25 8 2024 599 616 10.1038/s41580-024-00715-1 38528155
14 Zhou F. Wei L. Tang L. Shan M. Wang Z. Peng J. Zhang Z. Liu X. Zhang Q. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Nano-Interlocking enhanced electroactive dressing: electromagnetic induction for accelerated diabetic wound healing and wound microenvironment monitoring Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 52 2025 e08829 10.1002/adfm.202508829
15 Urabe H. Akimoto R. Kamiya S. Hosoki K. Ichikawa H. Nishiyama T. Effects of pulsed electrical stimulation on growth factor gene expression and proliferation in human dermal fibroblasts Mol. Cell. Biochem. 476 1 2021 361 368 10.1007/s11010-020-03912-6 32968926
16 Wu H. Wang Y. Li H. Hu Y. Liu Y. Jiang X. Sun H. Liu F. Xiao A. Chang T. Lin L. Yang K. Wang Z. Dong Z. Li Y. Dong S. Wang S. Chen J. Liu Y. Yin D. Zhang H. Liu M. Kong S. Yang Z. Yu X. Wang Y. Fan Y. Wang L. Yu C. Chang L. Accelerated intestinal wound healing via dual electrostimulation from a doft and biodegradable electronic bandage Nat. Electron. 7 4 2024 299 312 10.1038/s41928-024-01138-8
17 Wang Y. Ma Q. Zheng B. Xiong W. Miao D. Li Y. Huang R. Wang H. Wu D. Electroactive dressing with selective sorption of exudate enables treatment of complicated wound Adv. Mater. 37 10 2025 2413320 10.1002/adma.202413320 40072029
18 Shi C. Wang H. Wang X. Li K. Liu P. Wang L. Yu H. A safe, stable, simple, serviceable, and self-powered wound dressing with continuous low-voltage direct Current electrical stimulation: an efficient approach to accelerate wound healing Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 29 2025 2422188 10.1002/adfm.202422188
19 Hu W. Wei X. Zhu L. Yin D. Wei A. Bi X. Liu T. Zhou G. Qiang Y. Sun X. Wen Z. Pan Y. Enhancing proliferation and migration of fibroblast cells by electric stimulation based on a triboelectric nanogenerator Nano Energy 57 2019 600 607 10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.12.077
20 Geng K. Wang J. Liu P. Tian X. Liu H. Wang X. Hu C. Yan H. Electrical stimulation facilitates the angiogenesis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells through MAPK/ERK signaling pathway by stimulating FGF2 secretion Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 317 2 2019 C277 C286 10.1152/ajpcell.00474.2018 30995109
21 Shi J. Kuang M. Liu X. Ding M. Zhang Y. Yuan X. Li R. Zhang Y. Yang Y. Wang L. Kang Y. Ji X. Humidity-Gated moisture-electric therapy via dual-modal eelectrostimulation for adaptive bioelectronic interventions Adv. Mater. 38 3 2026 e09865 10.1002/adma.202509865 41001998
22 Zhou F. Li Y. Wang S. Wu X. Peng J. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Turning waste into valuables: in situ deposition of polypyrrole on the obsolete mask for Cr(VI) removal and desalination Separ. Purif. Technol. 306 2023 122643 10.1016/j.seppur.2022.122643 PMC9661547 36406342
23 Wang S. Li Y. Wei L. Zhu J. Zhang Q. Lan L. Tang L. Wang F. Zhang Z. Wang L. Mao J. Strain-Insensitive supercapacitors for self-powered sensing textiles ACS Nano 19 6 2025 6357 6370 10.1021/acsnano.4c16352 39913174
24 Tang S. Zheng J. Antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles: structural effects Adv. Healthcare Mater. 7 13 2018 1701503 10.1002/adhm.201701503 29808627
25 Wu M. Ma B. Pan T. Chen S. Sun J. Silver-Nanoparticle-Colored cotton fabrics with tunable colors and durable antibacterial and self-healing superhydrophobic properties Adv. Funct. Mater. 26 4 2016 569 576 10.1002/adfm.201504197
26 Zhu J. Zeng Q. Liu Y. Lin Y. Ma D. Wen T. Li P. Zhou W. Smart nanosilver strikes twice: precision bacteria killing meets autophagy-boosted healing for infected wounds Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 48 2025 2507797 10.1002/adfm.202507797
27 Li X.-R. Yin B. Gao L. Li X. Huang H. Song G. Zhou Y.-G. One-Step reduction-encapsulated synthesis of Ag@polydopamine multicore-shell nanosystem for enhanced photoacoustic imaging and photothermal-chemodynamic cancer therapy Nano Res. 15 9 2022 8291 8303 10.1007/s12274-022-4474-4
28 Lan L. Li Y. Zhu J. Zhang Q. Wang S. Zhang Z. Wang L. Mao J. Highly flexible polypyrrole electrode with Acanthosphere-Like structures for energy storage and actuator applications Chem. Eng. J. 455 2023 140675 10.1016/j.cej.2022.140675
29 Zhang S. Yang Y. Gao B. Li Y.C. Liu Z. Superhydrophobic controlled-release fertilizers coated with bio-based polymers with organosilicon and Nano-Silica modifications J. Mater. Chem. A 5 37 2017 19943 19953 10.1039/C7TA06014A
30 Jiang Z. Zhang W. Zhu C. Hu Z. Xiang X. Cao D. Wang X. Copper telluride@sodium Alginate-Poly(vinyl alcohol) Nanofiber/Gauze wound dressing for gram-negative bacteria-infected wounds ACS Nano 19 28 2025 26170 26192 10.1021/acsnano.5c07686 40650617
31 Yang G. Xie B. Tian J. Zhang Y. Liu Y. Gong H. Pang B. Qiu Y. Gong C. Bu T. Yin Z. Wu H. A wireless hydrogel thermotherapy System with adhesion-customizable interfaces for accelerating wound healing Adv. Mater. 38 6 2026 e13302 10.1002/adma.202513302 41169055
32 Wang Z. Zhou F. Li Y. Wang S. Li W. Liu H. Hu M. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Hierarchical Polypyrrole@MXene (Ti3C2TX) fiber strain sensors for wearable healthcare electronics Chem. Eng. J. 498 2024 155352 10.1016/j.cej.2024.155352
33 Li Y. Liu X. Wang S. Li W. Wang Q. Guo L. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Dopamine-Induced high fiber wetness for improved conductive fiber bundles with striated polypyrrole coating toward wearable healthcare electronics Chem. Eng. J. 485 2024 149888 10.1016/j.cej.2024.149888
34 Qi F. Liao R. Wu P. Li H. Zan J. Peng S. Shuai C. An electrical microenvironment constructed based on electromagnetic induction stimulates neural differentiation Mater. Chem. Front. 7 8 2023 1671 1683 10.1039/D2QM01193J
35 Zhou F. Wei L. Tang L. Shan M. Wang Z. Peng J. Zhang Z. Liu X. Zhang Q. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Nano-Interlocking enhanced electroactive dressing: electromagnetic induction for accelerated diabetic wound healing and wound microenvironment monitoring Adv. Funct. Mater. n/ a n/a 2025 e08829 10.1002/adfm.202508829
36 Liu S. Zhu L.-F. Chang M.-W. Li C. Wang T. Wang R. Yan X. Wang B. Magnetic field-assisted conductive nerve guidance conduit enabling peripheral nerve regeneration with wireless electrical stimulation Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 34 2025 2416548 10.1002/adfm.202416548
37 Dhaouadi E. Hinkov I. Pashova K. Challab N. Roussigné Y. Abderrabba M. Farhat S. Computer-Aided design of graphene and 2D materials synthesis via magnetic inductive heating of 11 transition metals J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 55 10 2022 105302 10.1088/1361-6463/ac357d
38 Zhang X. Yu N. Ren Q. Niu S. Zhu L. Hong L. Cui K. Wang X. Jiang W. Wen M. Chen Z. Janus nanofiber membranes with photothermal-enhanced biofluid drainage and sterilization for diabetic wounds Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 24 2024 2315020 10.1002/adfm.202315020
39 Wang L. Luo Y. Song Y. He X. Xu T. Zhang X. Hydrogel-Functionalized bandages with janus wettability for efficient unidirectional drug delivery and wound care ACS Nano 18 4 2024 3468 3479 10.1021/acsnano.3c10766 38227490
40 Wang Y. Zhang Q. Liu Z. Jin C. Rao Y. Yuan X. He Q. Lu L. Guo J. Yan F. Janus fibrous dressing with controllable nitric oxide-releasing and unidirectional exudate transport activities for bacteria-infected burn wound therapy Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 45 2025 2503992 10.1002/adfm.202503992
41 Wen M. Yu N. Zhang X. Zhao W. Qiu P. Feng W. Chen Z. Chen Y. Zhu M. Cactus thorn-inspired Janus Nanofiber membranes as a water diode for light-enhanced diabetic wound healing Nano-Micro Lett. 18 1 2026 101 10.1007/s40820-025-01904-z PMC12770207 41491243
42 Zhou F. Li Y. Wei L. Wang S. Lan L. Peng J. Wang Z. Hu M. Wang F. Wang L. Mao J. Lawn-Inspired polypyrrole functionalized waste fabrics for chromium removal through a combination of adsorption and interface evaporation Appl. Surf. Sci. 640 2023 158351 10.1016/j.apsusc.2023.158351
43 Zhang X. Pan J. Zhu Y. Hai W. Zhang Y. Li M. Zhang B. Jiang J. Bi S. Shao H. Chen N. Shao G. Inspired by turtle: 3D raised knitted solar evaporator achieves efficient seawater desalination Desalination 614 2025 119191 10.1016/j.desal.2025.119191
44 Zhang R. Feng J. Chen H. Zhang G. Liang X. Xu C. Li Y. Xu F.-J. Hybrid hydrogel with photothermal stimulation elicits immunomodulation-mediated wound healing Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 7 2025 2419170 10.1002/adfm.202419170
45 Sun Z. Fan C. Tang X. Zhao J. Song Y. Shao Z. Xu L. Characterization and antibacterial properties of porous fibers containing silver ions Appl. Surf. Sci. 387 2016 828 838 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.07.015
46 Li G. Zhang D. Qin S. Preparation and performance of antibacterial polyvinyl Alcohol/Polyethylene Glycol/Chitosan hydrogels containing silver chloride nanoparticles via one-step method Nanomaterials 9 7 2019 972 10.3390/nano9070972 31277280 PMC6669572
47 Zhao Y. Liu Y. Tian C. Liu Z. Wu K. Zhang C. Han X. Construction of antibacterial photothermal PCL/AgNPs/BP nanofibers for infected wound healing Mater. Des. 226 2023 111670 10.1016/j.matdes.2023.111670
48 Zhang Q. Zhu J. Liu H. Fei X. Zhu M. Magneto-Mechano-Electric Cascade stimulation System accelerates wound healing constructed by biodegradable magnetoelectric nanofibers Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 9 2024 2309968 10.1002/adfm.202309968
49 Zhao B. Sun J. Xu Y. Li J. Xie K. Zhou C. Su B. Chen L. Programmed temporal modulation by using a magnetoelectric wound dressing for ultra-fast early-stage wound healing Biomaterials 325 2026 123569 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123569 40737728
50 Kang Y. Liu X. Wang J. Peng P. Liang M. Wang Q. Zheng W. Li S. Gao C. Rod-Shaped microgel scaffolds with interconnective pores and oxygen-generating functions promote skin wound healing and alleviate hypertrophic scar Formation Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 7 2025 2413678 10.1002/adfm.202413678
51 Chu B. Qin X. Zhu Q. Wang H. Wen Z. Sun X. He Y. Lee S.-T. Triboelectric Current stimulation alleviates in vitro cell migration and in vivo tumor metastasis Nano Energy 100 2022 107471 10.1016/j.nanoen.2022.107471
52 Gao K. Shang S. Wei B. Feng Z. Lu X. Yang X. Shen W. Cui L. Wang H. Zhou H. Liu H. Sun C. Magneto-Motivated intracellular wireless nanodischarge System induces neural stem cell differentiation and spinal cord Injury repair Adv. Funct. Mater. 36 11 2026 e12370 10.1002/adfm.202512370
53 Chen S. Zhu G. Zheng X. Wei L. Wang Y. Wang S. Zhao F. Wang F. Zhang Z. Mao J. Wang L. A mechano-immunological combination strategy for in situ heart valve regeneration via a multiscale all-fiber scaffold Adv. Fiber Mater. 2026 10.1007/s42765-025-00676-w
54 Nqakala Z.B. Sibuyi N.R.S. Fadaka A.O. Meyer M. Onani M.O. Madiehe A.M. Advances in nanotechnology towards development of silver nanoparticle-based wound-healing agents Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 20 2021 11272 10.3390/ijms222011272 PMC8539597 34681930
55 Yang Y. Fang Q. Wang J. Li M. Li Z. Xu H. Huang S. Chen J. Guo B. Glucose-Activated programmed hydrogel with self-switchable enzyme-like activity for infected diabetic wound self-adaptive treatment Adv. Mater. 37 12 2025 2419158 10.1002/adma.202419158 39945084
56 Li H. Wei S. Ling Q. Wang R. Liu T. Yu H. Zhao P. Zhang K. Bian L. Liao W. Nanozyme-Reinforced hydrogel spray as a reactive oxygen species-driven oxygenator to accelerate diabetic wound healing Adv. Mater. 37 34 2025 2504829 10.1002/adma.202504829 40492891
57 Liu H. Qin S. Zhang H. Chen Z. Zhao Y. Liu J. Deng Y. Liu M. Chen W. Wang Z. Wang L. Silk sericin-based ROS-Responsive oxygen generating microneedle platform promotes angiogenesis and decreases inflammation for Scarless diabetic wound healing Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 7 2025 2404461 10.1002/adfm.202404461
58 Shan M. Li Y. Wei L. Li W. Zhao F. Wang F. Zhang Z. Wang G. Wang L. Mao J. A self-locking conductive cardiac patch for immediate electrical integration with infarcted rat myocardium Bioact. Mater. 56 2026 623 640 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2025.10.045 41281893 PMC12630037
59 Kong Y. Liu F. Ma B. Duan J. Yuan W. Sang Y. Han L. Wang S. Liu H. Wireless localized electrical stimulation generated by an ultrasound-driven piezoelectric discharge regulates proinflammatory macrophage polarization Adv. Sci. 8 13 2021 2100962 10.1002/advs.202100962 PMC8261497 34258169
60 Kaneda M.M. Messer K.S. Ralainirina N. Li H. Leem C.J. Gorjestani S. Woo G. Nguyen A.V. Figueiredo C.C. Foubert P. Schmid M.C. Pink M. Winkler D.G. Rausch M. Palombella V.J. Kutok J. McGovern K. Frazer K.A. Wu X. Karin M. Sasik R. Cohen E.E.W. Varner J.A. PI3Kγ is a molecular switch that controls immune suppression Nature 539 7629 2016 437 442 10.1038/nature19834 27642729 PMC5479689
61 Fu S. Yi S. Ke Q. Liu K. Xu H. A self-powered Hydrogel/Nanogenerator System accelerates wound healing by electricity-triggered On-Demand phosphatase and Tensin Homologue (PTEN) inhibition ACS Nano 17 20 2023 19652 19666 10.1021/acsnano.3c02561 37820299
62 Yan R. Zhang X. Wang H. Wang T. Ren G. Sun Q. Liang F. Zhu Y. Huang W. Yu H.-D. Autonomous, moisture-driven flexible electrogenerative dressing for enhanced wound healing Adv. Mater. 37 12 2025 2418074 10.1002/adma.202418074 39962841
63 Liu M. Zhang W. Han S. Zhang D. Zhou X. Guo X. Chen H. Wang H. Jin L. Feng S. Wei Z. Multifunctional conductive and Electrogenic Hydrogel repaired spinal cord injury via immunoregulation and enhancement of neuronal differentiation Adv. Mater. 36 21 2024 2313672 10.1002/adma.202313672 38308338
64 Lian M. Qiao Z. Qiao S. Zhang X. Lin J. Xu R. Zhu N. Tang T. Huang Z. Jiang W. Shi J. Hao Y. Lai H. Dai K. Nerve growth factor-preconditioned mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosome-functionalized 3D-Printed hierarchical porous scaffolds with Neuro-Promotive properties for enhancing innervated bone regeneration ACS Nano 18 10 2024 7504 7520 10.1021/acsnano.3c11890 38412232
65 Jeschke M.G. van Baar M.E. Choudhry M.A. Chung K.K. Gibran N.S. Logsetty S. Burn injury Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 6 1 2020 11 10.1038/s41572-020-0145-5 32054846 PMC7224101
66 Sadeghipour H. Torabi R. Gottschall J. Lujan-Hernandez J. Sachs D.H. Moore F.D. Jr. Cetrulo C.L. Jr. Blockade of IgM-Mediated inflammation alters wound progression in a swine model of partial-thickness burn J. Burn Care Res. 38 3 2017 148 160 10.1097/BCR.0000000000000459 27801682 PMC5397333
67 Song Y. Wei J. Li R. Fu R. Han P. Wang H. Zhang G. Li S. Chen S. Liu Z. Zhao Y. Zhu C. Zhu J. Zhang S. Pei H. Cheng J. Wu J. Dong L. Song G. Shen X. Yao Q. Tyrosine kinase receptor B attenuates liver fibrosis by inhibiting TGF-β/SMAD signaling Hepatology 78 5 2023 10.1097/HEP.0000000000000319 PMC10581422 36800849
68 Fang S. Xu C. Zhang Y. Xue C. Yang C. Bi H. Qian X. Wu M. Ji K. Zhao Y. Wang Y. Liu H. Xing X. Umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomal MicroRNAs suppress myofibroblast differentiation by inhibiting the transforming growth Factor-β/SMAD2 pathway during wound healing Stem Cells Transl. Med. 5 10 2016 1425 1439 10.5966/sctm.2015-0367 27388239 PMC5031180
69 Zhang T. Wang X.-F. Wang Z.-C. Lou D. Fang Q.-Q. Hu Y.-Y. Zhao W.-Y. Zhang L.-Y. Wu L.-H. Tan W.-Q. Current potential therapeutic strategies targeting the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway to attenuate keloid and hypertrophic scar Formation Biomed. Pharmacother. 129 2020 110287 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110287 32540643
70 H. Shu, T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Diao, Y. Xu, J. Long, T. Chen, M. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Huang, L. Zhang, Mechanoregulative hydrogel facilitates rapid scarless healing by self-adaptive control of wound niche at different stages, Sci. Adv. 11(21) eadv9895. 10.1126/sciadv.adv9895.PMC13109952 40408488
